Cryptographic primitives such as oblivious transfer and bit commitment
are impossible to realize if unconditional security is required against
adversaries who are unbounded in running time and memory size.
Therefore, it is a great challenge to come up with restrictions on the
adversary’s capabilities such that on one hand interesting cryptographic
primitives become possible, but on the other hand the model is still
realistic and as close to practice as possible.

The bounded-quantum-storage model is a prime example of such a
cryptographic model. In this thesis, we initiate the study of
cryptographic primitives with unconditional security under the sole
assumption that the adversary’s quantum memory is of bounded size.

Oblivious transfer and bit commitment can be implemented in this model
using protocols where honest parties need no quantum memory, whereas an
adversarial player needs to store at least a large fraction of the total
number of transmitted qubits in order to break the protocol. This is in
sharp contrast to the classical bounded-memory model, where we can only
tolerate adversaries with memory of size polynomially larger than the
honest players’ memory size.

On the practical side, our protocols are efficient, non-interactive and
can be adapted to cope with various kinds of noise in the transmission.
In fact, they can be implemented using today’s technology .

On the theoretical side, new entropic uncertainty relations involving
min-entropy are established and used to prove the security of protocols
in the bounded-quantum-storage model according to new strong security
definitions. The uncertainty relations lower bound the min-entropy of
the encoding used in most quantum-cryptographic protocols and therefore
contribute to the understanding of the quantum effects which these
protocols are based upon. The most direct way to make use of these lower
bounds is by assuming a quantum-memory bound on the adversary. For
instance, in the realistic setting of Quantum Key Distribution ( QKD )
against quantum-memory-bounded eavesdroppers, the uncertainty relation
allows to prove the security of QKD protocols while tolerating
considerably higher error rates compared to the standard model with
unbounded adversaries.

In addition, though not directly related to the bounded-quantum-storage
model, a classical result about unconditionally secure 1-out-of-2
Oblivious Transfer ( 1-2 OT ) is obtained. It is pointed out that the
standard security requirement for 1-2 OT of bits, namely that the
receiver only learns one of the bits sent, holds if and only if the
receiver has no information on the XOR of the two bits. This result
generalizes to 1-2 OT of strings, in which case the security can be
characterized in terms of binary linear functions . More precisely, it
is shown that the receiver learns only one of the two strings sent, if
and only if he has no information on the result of applying any binary
linear function which non-trivially depends on both inputs to the two
strings. This result not only gives new insight into the nature of 1-2
OT , but it in particular provides a powerful tool for analyzing 1-2 OT
protocols . With this characterization at hand, the reducibility of 1-2
OT of strings to a wide range of weaker primitives follows by a very
simple argument.
