A quasi-metric is a distance function which satisfies the triangle
inequality but is not symmetric: it can be thought of as an asymmetric
metric. Quasi-metrics were first introduced in 1930s and are a subject
of intensive research in the context of topology and theoretical
computer science.

The central result of this thesis, developed in Chapter 3, is that a
natural correspondence exists between similarity measures between
biological (nucleotide or protein) sequences and quasi-metrics. As
sequence similarity search is one of the most important techniques of
modern bioinformatics, this motivates a new direction of research:
development of geometric aspects of the theory of quasi-metric spaces
and its applications to similarity search in general and large protein
datasets in particular.

The thesis starts by presenting basic concepts of the theory of
quasi-metric spaces illustrated by numerous examples, some previously
known, some novel. In particular, the universal countable rational
quasi-metric space and its bicompletion, the universal bicomplete
separable quasi-metric space are constructed. Sets of biological
sequences with some commonly used similarity measures provide a further
and the most important example.

Chapter 4 is dedicated to development of a notion of the quasi-metric
space with Borel probability measure, or pq-space . The concept of a
@xmath -space is a generalisation of a notion of an @xmath -space from
the asymptotic geometric analysis: an @xmath -space is a metric space
with Borel measure that provides the framework for study of the
phenomenon of concentration of measure on high dimensional structures .
While some concepts and results are direct extensions of results about
@xmath -spaces, some are intrinsic to the quasi-metric case. One of the
main results of this chapter indicates that ‘a high dimensional
quasi-metric space is close to being a metric space’.

Chapter 5 investigates the geometric aspects of the theory of database
similarity search. It extends the existing concepts of a workload and an
indexing scheme in order to cover more general cases and introduces the
concept of a quasi-metric tree as an analogue to a metric tree , a
popular class of access methods for metric datasets. The results about
@xmath -spaces are used to produce some new theoretical bounds on
performance of indexing schemes.

Finally, the thesis presents some biological applications. Chapter 6
introduces FSIndex, an indexing scheme that significantly accelerates
similarity searches of short protein fragment datasets. The performance
of FSIndex turns out to be very good in comparison with existing access
methods. Chapter 7 presents the prototype of the system for discovery of
short functional protein motifs called PFMFind, which relies on FSIndex
for similarity searches.
