This thesis focuses on link scheduling in wireless mesh networks by
taking into account physical layer characteristics. The assumption made
throughout is that a packet is received successfully only if the Signal
to Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR) at the receiver exceeds a certain
threshold, termed as communication threshold. The thesis also discusses
the complementary problem of flow control.

First, we consider various problems on centralized link scheduling in
Spatial Time Division Multiple Access (STDMA) wireless mesh networks. We
motivate the use of spatial reuse as performance metric and provide an
explicit characterization of spatial reuse. We propose link scheduling
algorithms based on certain graph models (communication graph, SINR
graph) of the network. Our algorithms achieve higher spatial reuse than
that of existing algorithms, with only a slight increase in
computational complexity.

Next, we investigate a related scenario involving link scheduling,
namely random access algorithms in wireless networks. We assume that the
receiver is capable of power-based capture and propose a splitting
algorithm that varies transmission powers of users on the basis of
quaternary channel feedback. We model the algorithm dynamics by a
Discrete Time Markov Chain and consequently show that its maximum stable
throughput is 0.5518. Our algorithm achieves higher maximum stable
throughput and significantly lower delay than the First Come First Serve
(FCFS) splitting algorithm with uniform transmission power.

Finally, we consider the complementary problem of flow control in packet
networks from an information-theoretic perspective. We derive the
maximum entropy of a flow which conforms to traffic constraints imposed
by a generalized token bucket regulator, by taking into account the
covert information present in the randomness of packet lengths. Our
results demonstrate that the optimal generalized token bucket regulator
has a near uniform bucket depth sequence and a decreasing token
increment sequence.
