This thesis discusses two different approaches for the measurement of
cosmic-ray antiparticles in the GeV to TeV energy range.

The first part studies the prospects of antiparticle flux measurements
with the proposed PEBS detector. The project allots long duration
balloon flights at one of Earth’s poles at an altitude of 40 km. The
detector consists of a transition radiation detector, a time of flight
system, a combined silicon and scintillating fiber tracker and an
electromagnetic calorimeter. All detectors are placed in a
superconducting magnet which creates a field of 0.8 T. Several flights
are discussed starting from 2012 to get a total of 100  days measurement
time with an acceptance of 0.4 m @xmath sr. This work calculates the
systematic effects due to interactions of cosmic rays in the atmosphere.
GEANT4 simulations were carried out which determine the atmospheric
background and attenuation especially for antiparticles. Projected
results taking the effects of the atmosphere and the detector properties
into account are discussed.

The second part covers the AMS-02 experiment which will be installed in
2010 on the International Space Station at an altitude of about 400 km
for about three years to measure cosmic rays without the influence of
Earth’s atmosphere. The detector consists of several subdetectors for
the determination of particle properties, namely a transition radiation
detector, a time of flight system, a cylindrical silicon tracker with
eight layers surrounded by an anticoincidence counter in a
superconducting magnet with a field of about 0.8 T strength, a ring
image Čerenkov detector and an electromagnetic calorimeter. The total
acceptance with and without the electromagnetic calorimeter is 0.095 m
@xmath sr and 0.45 m @xmath sr, respectively. The present work focuses
on the anticoincidence counter system (ACC). The ACC is needed to reduce
the trigger rate during periods of high fluxes and to reject events with
external particles crossing the tracker from the side or with particles
resulting from interactions within the detector which have possibly
disturbed charge and momentum measurements. The last point is especially
important for the measurement of antinuclei and antiparticles. The ACC
has a modular design of 16 singular plastic scintillator panels which
form a cylinder around the tracker with a a diameter of 1100 mm, a
height of 830 mm and a thickness of 8 mm. The scintillator light is
guided by wavelength shifting and clear fibers to photomultiplier tubes.
The detector has to cope with several challenges: Fast response and
stable operation in a high magnetic field are required. The detector has
to withstand a launch with a Space Shuttle into space. The power
consumption is only 800 mW and the total weight is 54 kg. The
qualification and performance tests of the panels, fibers,
photomultiplier tubes and flight electronics are described. The ACC
detection efficiency for charged particles is extracted from testbeam
and atmospheric muon measurements and simulations and enters as input to
the antimatter measurement performance. In addition, the AMS-02
possibilities for the detection of positrons and antiprotons are
studied.
