This thesis presents some results of the nonlinear dynamics experiments
in an argon dc glow discharge plasma. The thesis has been divided into
six Sections.

Section 1 contains an introduction to nonlinear dynamics experiments in
plasmas, and the time series analysis. The study of nonlinear dynamics
or chaos theory has emerged in the last three decades or so as an
important interdisciplinary area of research encompassing a wide range
of fields like: fluids, plasmas, biomedical sciences, finance,
turbulence, astronomy, material sciences, etc. The advent of fast
computing systems have been of great help in solving nonlinear equations
which were intractable analytically. Low dimensional deterministic chaos
has become a part and parcel of almost every field of engineering like,
mechanical, electrical, civil, chemical, etc., and this has lead to the
development of new tools and data analysis techniques, like nonlinear
time series analysis, wavelet transform, etc.

In an electron beam plasma system in 1984, Boswell showed that the
natural oscillations of an electron beam propagating parallel to a
magnetic field, went through a period doubling bifurcation to a chaotic
state with increase in the beam current. In 1989, the intermittency
route to a chaos was observed in the low frequency self oscillations in
the undriven DC discharge system. Homoclinic chaos was reported in the
same electrical discharge plasma system in which the deterministic chaos
had been observed by T. Braun, et al. Period adding route to chaos and
period subtracting had been observed in on ion beam plasma in a double
plasma device. Other nonlinear phenomena like mode locking, period
pulling, etc., had been observed by Klinger et al. In many other
experiments almost a similar phenomena had been observed where different
types of gases, geometric configurations and parametric regimes were
explored.

In all the above experiments, the common feature was that the plasma
dynamics goes towards a chaotic state as the discharge current or
voltage (DV) was raised. On the other hand, the inverse route, i.e.,
chaos to ordered state transition has not been observed experimentally
in plasmas. The possibility of such a route in a plasma sheath had been
shown by Tomejiro Yamagishi and Makoto Tsukayama [Tomejiro Yamagishi and
Makoto Tsukayama, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 69, 2883 (2000)]. numerically, in
the presence of dissipation. Generally, with dissipation or decrease in
the input energy, the system goes to an ordered state. In our
experiments the chaotic behavior of the floating potential fluctuations,
goes to a regular state with increasing DV.

In Section 2, we have described the experimental setup, diagnostics, and
data analysis procedures. The experiments were preformed in an argon dc
glow discharge plasma. Plasma was produced inside a cylindrical hollow
cathode dc glow discharge system of radius 45 mm and cylindrical anode
of radius @xmath mm placed inside the cathode concentrically. The entire
electrode system was housed inside a vacuum chamber whose pressure (p)
could be varied between 0.001 to 1 bar. A dc discharge voltage applied
between the two electrodes produced the plasma, and a Langmuir probe
located between the anode and the cathode was used to monitor the
floating potential fluctuations, and a black and white CCD camera was
used to measure the size of the anode glow. The noise (HP33120A) and a
signal generators (Fluke PM5138A) were coupled with the discharge power
supply for the noise induced experiments. The measured plasma density
and the electron temperature were about @xmath and @xmath eV
respectively, and the corresponding electron plasma frequency ( @xmath )
and the ion plasma frequency ( @xmath ) were about 28 MHz and 105 kHz
respectively. The analysis of the floating potential fluctuations has
been carried out using the linear and nonlinear time series analysis. In
the linear analysis, power spectrum, autocorrelation, probability
density function, etc., and in nonlinear analysis Lyapunov exponent,
correlation dimension, Hurst exponent, etc., have been estimated. Some
statistical tools like ‘normal variance’ and ‘absolute mean difference’
have also been used to characterize coherence and stochastic resonances.
Most of the data analysis were carried out using the software MATLAB.

In Section 3, we have presented anode glow related observation of chaos
to order transition and homoclinic bifurcation in the glow discharge
plasma. Depending upon the gas pressure (p), a discharge was struck at
different discharge voltages (DV), which exhibits a Paschen curve like
behavior. The region to the left of the Paschen minimum is narrower than
the region to the right and the behavior of the plasma floating
potential fluctuations was different on these two sides of the Paschen
curve. To right of the Paschen minimum, an anode glow or anode spot was
observed to form on the anode, whose size decreased with the increase in
the DV, before finally disappearing at a certain DV. The annular radii
of the glow estimated from the experimental observations was in the
range of @xmath mm. This is consistent with the theoretical estimations
of thickness ( @xmath ) using the relation @xmath , where k, T, @xmath ,
and P are the Boltzmann constant, room temperature in Kelvin scale,
ionization cross-section in @xmath and pressure in mbar respectively.
The estimated thickness of the anode glow using the above relation for
@xmath mbar, @xmath K, is @xmath mm is within the range of the thickness
as obtained from the experiment ( @xmath mm).

The floating potential fluctuations have been analyzed for three typical
pressures in the region greater than the Paschen minimum. At about 0.89
mbar ( @xmath mbar-mm), the discharge was initiated at @xmath V and
simultaneously irregular relaxation type of oscillations were observed
but turned into regular oscillations with increase in the DVs. Around
509 V, these oscillations disappeared and this point (DV) is termed as
the bifurcation point ( @xmath ). A similar behaviour was observed at
0.95 mbar ( @xmath mbar mm) and at 1 mbar ( @xmath mbar mm ). Initially,
the power spectrum of the oscillations are of broad band nature
indicating a chaotic behavior of the system. An estimate of the
frequency of these instabilities from the ion transit time in the plasma
@xmath , where d is the electrode distance, is @xmath kHz which agrees
quite well with the frequency of the relaxation oscillations of the
floating potential.

The relaxation oscillations have been attributed to the formation of
highly nonlinear structures like double layers, and hence, we tried to
estimate the correlation dimension ( @xmath ) and the +ve Lyapunov
exponent ( @xmath ) of all the signals. The estimated @xmath for the
three pressures (0.89, 0.95 and 1.0 mbar) were greater than 3.8 to begin
with and decreased with increase in DV. Since @xmath is a measure of the
complexity of the system, initially, the system was in a complex state
as @xmath for all the three pressures were high and decreased with
increase in DV.The presence of a +ve Lyapunov exponent ( @xmath ) is the
most reliable signature of the chaotic dynamics. Positive @xmath was
obtained for DV 283, 284, and 290 V at 0.95 mbar and for 293, 296, 300
and 305 V at 1 mbar respectively. At higher pressures we find that in
general @xmath is +ve and @xmath , suggesting a low dimensional chaos.
Wavelet analysis also showed a presence of chaos at the initial stage of
the discharge.

Generally, the floating potential fluctuations were complex in nature at
the initial stage of discharge and became regular with increase in DV
and converted to relaxation oscillations before totally vanishing at the
bifurcation point ( @xmath ).

The time period (T) of these relaxation oscillations increases with
increasing DV, before eventually vanishing beyond a critical DV ( @xmath
), and for larger values, the autonomous dynamics exhibits a steady
state fixed point behavior. It is observed that the autonomous dynamics
undergoes an exponential slowing down. It is observed that @xmath vs
Time is a straight line, indicating that the system goes through a
homoclinic bifurcation. The floating potential fluctuations exhibit
relaxation oscillations on the one side of the @xmath (bifurcation
point) and a stable fixed point on the other side, called the excitable
state and is useful to study noise invoked dynamics @xmath stochastic
and coherence resonances.

In Section 4, the noise invoked dynamics has been investigated. When the
DV is modulated with a stochastic signal, the autonomous dynamics will
be recovered and this phenomena is termed as coherence resonance. For
stochastic resonance, the DV was perturbed by a combination of a
subthreshold periodic pulse train and a Gaussian white noise. The time
series of the system response in the presence of an identical
subthreshold signal for three different amplitudes of imposed noise. It
is observed that there is little correspondence between the subthreshold
signal and the system response for a low noise amplitude. However, there
is an excellent correspondence at an intermediate noise amplitude.
Finally, at higher amplitudes of noise, the subthreshold signal is lost
amidst stochastic fluctuations of the system response. Absolute mean
difference (AMD) has been used to quantify the information transfer
between the subthreshold signal and the system response and the unimodal
structure is the signature of the SR phenomena.

In Sections 5, we have presented the observation self organized
criticality behavior in plasma. When the system was operated in the
pressure region less than the Paschen minimum, for a small range of p (
@xmath Torr or @xmath mbar), it was observed that the behavior of the
floating potential fluctuations was consistent with self organized
criticality (SOC). In order to establish the SOC behavior, we had
checked the power law behavior of the power spectrum, and the presence
of the long-range correlation by estimating Hurst exponent (H) (using
R/S technique) and the exponent ( @xmath ) of autocorrelation function
(ACF) decay, and the nongaussian probability distribution function. The
results of the Hurst exponent ( @xmath ) being greater than 0.5, the ACF
exponent, @xmath , nongaussian PDF, and power spectral index @xmath in
the pressure range @xmath Torr, are consistent with the systems
exhibiting SOC like behavior.

Finally, we have presented a summary and future plan of work in Section
6. Though we have investigated some very important and interesting
nonlinear processes during the the course of this thesis work, there
are, many problems which we plan to take up as a part of our future
activities, are as follows.

-   Effect of the noise on the autonomous dynamics.

-   Effect of suprathreshold signal and noise to the plasma.

-   Investigation of the existence of canard orbits in plasma.

-   Non-chaotic attractors may be investigated by applying two
    non-commensurate periodic signals.

-   Chaos control and synchronization.

-   Modeling of the experimental results.

Dusty plasma which can be produced very easily in our experimental
system, is another area where, a lot of nonlinear phenomena can be
explored.
