##### Contents

-    I Introduction
    -    1 Introduction
        -    1.1 Fundamentals of accretion disc theory
        -    1.2 Astrophysical black holes
        -    1.3 Observations
        -    1.4 Variability of black-hole accretion discs
-    II Transonic Accretion and Viscous Overstability
    -    2 Introduction
        -    2.1 Steady transonic accretion
        -    2.2 Viscous overstability and the stability of transonic
            accretion
        -    2.3 Summary and open questions
    -    3 Time-dependent transonic accretion
        -    3.1 Equations and numerical method
        -    3.2 Results
        -    3.3 Discussion
        -    3.4 Conclusions
-    III Oscillations in Black-Hole Accretion Discs
    -    4 Introduction
        -    4.1 Motivation
        -    4.2 Mathematical analysis of disc oscillations
        -    4.3 Global oscillations
        -    4.4 Summary
    -    5 Excitation Mechanism
        -    5.1 Introduction
        -    5.2 Trapped inertial oscillations
        -    5.3 Growth of oscillations in deformed discs
        -    5.4 Discussion
        -    5.5 Conclusions
    -    6 Warp and Eccentricity
        -    6.1 Introduction
        -    6.2 Disc model
        -    6.3 Stationary propagation of warp and eccentricity
        -    6.4 Results and Discussion
        -    6.5 Conclusion
    -    7 Influence of background inflow on wave propagation
        -    7.1 Introduction
        -    7.2 Wave reflection at the sonic point — a toy model
        -    7.3 Inertial waves
-    IV Conclusion
    -    8 Conclusion
        -    8.1 Summary and conclusions
        -    8.2 Observational relevance
        -    8.3 Theoretical difficulties and numerical simulations

## Part I Introduction

### Chapter 1 Introduction

Variability is a defining feature of astrophysical objects. Jupiter has
a constantly changing atmosphere and its satellite Io sees its surface
modified by over 400 active volcanoes. The Sun changes its spots during
the 11-year cycle while other stars vary strongly in brightness as they
pulsate. In the solar case, variability is intrinsic to the
astrophysical object. It can also be extrinsic if, e.g., caused by an
eclipsing star in a binary which produces luminosity variations as seen
by an observer on Earth. Io’s variability is indirectly caused by
Jupiter — tidal effects are responsible for the planet’s internal
heating and consequent geological activity. Whether intrinsic or
extrinsic, variations can be sporadic, irregular, semi-regular or
periodic and may occur at a myriad of time scales even in a single
object.

One of the most spectacular examples of variability is that of active
galactic nuclei (AGN). Observations show that these compact regions,
located at the centre of some galaxies, are not only abnormally luminous
but also show extremely rapid variations. These phenomena have long (
Lynden-Bell 1969 ) been attributed to the presence of a supermassive
black hole which releases energy as it accretes matter in its
surroundings.

The discovery of the first AGN and galactic X-ray sources in the 60s and
the theoretical studies that followed established accretion as a major
energy production mechanism. Subsequently, accretion around black holes
was the target of a series of ground-breaking studies, some of which
established the basis of accretion disc theory and remain the standard
reference today ( Pringle & Rees 1972 ; Shakura & Sunyaev 1973 ; Novikov
& Thorne 1973 ) . Other important developments in the theoretical
modelling of accretion flows arrived scatteredly in the following 20
years or so with the identification of accretion solutions beyond the
standard thin disc (e.g. Ichimaru 1977 ; Rees et al. 1982 ; Narayan & Yi
1994 ) and with the re-discovery of an efficient mechanism for angular
momentum transport (fundamental for accretion) by Balbus & Hawley ( 1991
) .

The decades of 60 and 70 also saw major improvements in observational
astronomy. New techniques were developed and telescopes and satellites
able to capture the light emitted by astrophysical objects at the full
spectral range began to operate. Of particular importance was the
development of X-ray astronomy. This highly energetic emission is
expected in accreting compact objects, such as neutron stars or black
holes, where the surrounding gas is heated to very high temperatures as
it falls in the gravitational field of these bodies.

The first galactic X-ray source, Scorpius X-1, was detected in the early
60s and the studies of Shklovsky ( 1967 ) connected the X-ray emission
from the object to gas accretion onto a neutron star. More X-ray objects
were discovered with the launch of various satellites in the 70s. Most
sources were believed to be in binaries where a normal star provided the
material to be accreted by the neutron star or black hole; the term
X-ray binaries was coined to describe such systems. The presence of a
normal star permits a lower limit for the mass of the compact object to
be determined, providing evidence for the very existence of black holes.
Another X-ray source, Cygnus X-1, was the first strong candidate and is
now widely believed to be one of these relativistic objects.

Variability in the X-ray emission of galactic sources has been a
constant from the very beginning of the observational burst of such
systems. For example, Cygnus X-1 has long been known to exhibit
variability on time scales down to a millisecond as shown by Rothschild
et al. ( 1974 ) . The same authors suggested this could be related to
the turbulence in the accretion disc surrounding the source. At longer
time scales, variability may be due to changes in the mass accretion
rate (e.g. Prendergast & Burbridge 1968 , in the case of Scorpius X-1) .

X-ray astronomy had another major impulse in the last couple of decades
with the launch of several X-ray observatories, including NASA’s Rossi
X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE). It is mainly thanks to these satellites
that, so far, about 20 X-ray binaries believed to contain a black hole
have been identified and analysed in detail. These new observatories
also contributed to important developments in the field of X-ray
variability, in particular at very short time scales. One of the most
exciting discoveries was that of quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs) with
frequencies up to 450 Hz. The very high frequencies connect these
oscillations to the inner regions of the accretion disc, making them
fundamental in the study of the relation of relativistic compact objects
with their surroundings.

Measurements of X-ray variability and theoretical studies of black-hole
disc accretion have therefore been intimately related for the past 30 or
40 years. Combined, they provide a unique window to the physics of
strong gravitational fields, allowing for properties of both the
accretion disc and the black hole to be inferred. Moreover, the
development of X-ray observations and black-hole accretion disc theory
is fundamental to test not only stellar evolution theories but also
general relativity.

The launch of new satellites provided a significant boom in the field of
observational X-ray astronomy and X-ray variability but black-hole
accretion disc theory is, at present, far from being up-to-date with its
observational counterpart. With this thesis, I aim to contribute to the
development of the theory of accretion discs around black holes with a
particular emphasis on the rapid variability of such objects. The
research done focuses on two major topics. The first concerns the
stability of models that describe the transition between the region
where accretion is disc-like and subsonic to the region inside the
marginally stable orbit where typical radial velocities are supersonic
(Part II ). The second focuses on the study of oscillations in
black-hole accretion discs with emphasis on an excitation mechanism
involving global deformations and on wave-reflection properties at the
inner disc boundary (Part III ). A relation with quasi-periodic
variability is explored in both parts.

In the current chapter, I present the general background of black-hole
accretion disc theory and observations and underline the importance of
studying the variability of these objects. A more detailed outline of
the research described in this thesis is given at the end of Part I .

#### 1.1 Fundamentals of accretion disc theory

According to the Oxford English Dictionary accretion can be defined as
“the assimilation of external matter by a growing body”. This physical
process is of key importance in astrophysics. When the “growing body”
(the central object) is compact, accretion is an extremely efficient
energy release mechanism believed to power some of the most fascinating
objects in the Universe. The basic idea is simple: a particle in orbit
in the gravitational field of a body of mass @xmath and radius @xmath ,
located at a distance @xmath from the central object radiates away
potential energy as it moves to smaller radii eventually reaching the
central body. The radiated energy is proportional to @xmath , making
accretion more efficient the heavier and more compact the central object
is.

In more realistic situations, accretion of a gas as opposed to accretion
of a point mass is considered. Early calculations described such process
as being spherically symmetric (e.g. Bondi 1952 ) . However, it is now
widely accepted that, in most cases of astrophysical interest, accretion
occurs by means of a disc: the accreted material becomes rotationally
supported as it approaches the central mass (aside, possibly, from the
very inner region). The reason is that the accreted matter will
generally possess nonzero angular momentum which has to be removed for
accretion to occur.

This can easily be understood by going back to the point mass accretion
case for a moment. It is clear that energy is released when the particle
moves inwards. If the point mass moves around the central object in a
circular orbit (the lowest-energy trajectory for a given angular
momentum) it possesses a nonzero specific angular momentum equal to
@xmath , @xmath being the gravitational constant. It is therefore
straightforward to see that if the particle is to move inwards, angular
momentum needs to be removed. An accretion disc is an example of a flow
where energy is released by transferring angular momentum outwards and
mass inwards. The outward transport of angular momentum occurs due to
the action of viscous torques (friction) within the disc. The exact
mechanism in the origin of this transport is still a central issue in
accretion-disc theory and is discussed further below.

A disc-like structure is indeed the preferred shape originating from a
rotating cloud of gas. Most astrophysical objects form from the
gravitational collapse of such gas clouds. If gravity is the main force
in the problem, the gas collapses onto a point in a
spherically-symmetric fashion. However, if the cloud is initially
rotating, the centrifugal force — which mainly acts in the plane
perpendicular to the axis of rotation — should also be taken into
account. The balance between gravity and centrifugal force is such that
the result of the collapse is a disc instead of a point. Even if the
cloud is initially slowly rotating, by conservation of angular momentum
rotation becomes faster and faster as the object collapses.

There are many examples of accretion discs in astrophysics. They are
believed to exist around most young stellar objects similar to the
primordial Sun, in interacting binary stars and AGNs just to name a few.
In addition, direct imaging has been obtained of protoplanetary discs (
Wood et al. 2002 ) and of an obscuring disc surrounding an AGN (
Gallimore et al. 1997 ) . The existence of accretion discs is beyond
question.

The focus of this thesis is on black-hole accretion discs typically
present in close binary systems. In the case of interest, the more
massive (primary) star in the binary evolves more rapidly than the
secondary, reaching the end of its life cycle as a black hole. If the
normal star, still evolving, and the compact object are close enough,
the secondary may fill its Roche lobe and start transferring matter to
its companion. Due to the rotation of the binary, the transferred
material has too much angular momentum and is unable to fall directly
onto the hole. Instead, the matter is spread around the compact object
forming an accretion disc which allows for angular momentum to be
reduced before the material is accreted. The disc is thought to be thin
enough so that packets of gas or fluid elements move in approximately
Keplerian orbits (except very close to the black hole or neutron star,
where general relativistic effects have to be taken into account). Part
of the orbital energy is converted into heat by dissipative processes
and eventually some of it is radiated away. Viscosity can provide
efficient dissipation and enable angular momentum transport:
neighbouring rings orbiting at slightly different velocities rub against
each other and the viscous stresses cause the matter in the ring to be
spread and to dissipate energy, causing the gas to slowly spiral
inwards. Angular momentum is transferred outwards and eventually removed
from the outer disc and given to the binary orbit through tidal torques
exerted by the secondary.

##### 1.1.1 Viscosity

As seen before, for the gas in a disc to sink further into the
gravitational potential, and eventually be accreted by the central
object, it needs to lose angular momentum by means of viscous torques.
What remains unknown, and is to date not completely understood, is the
exact nature of this “viscosity”. The time for the gas to spiral in from
the secondary to the object in the centre of the disc can be estimated
from observations of dwarf novae and X-ray transients (e.g. King et al.
2007 ) . This gives an indication of how efficient the angular momentum
transport mechanism needs to be to explain the measured accretion times.
Such estimates ruled out natural viscosity (related to the momentum
transport due to thermal motion of particles), which provides a
coefficient of kinematic viscosity @xmath several orders of magnitude
smaller than that required to explain the observed accretion times. A
promising idea to interpret the rate of removal of angular momentum
considers an additional form of viscosity: that coming from the
turbulent motions in the gas. This “turbulent viscosity” @xmath takes
into account the momentum transport due to turbulent eddies which can be
thought of as large-scale molecules. This enhanced viscosity provides
the main contribution to the total coefficient of kinematic viscosity
which, as a result, has the necessary magnitude to agree with
observational measurements.

The idea that turbulent motions would enable outward transport of
angular momentum was considered by von Weizsäcker ( 1948 ) and later by
Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) . However, a full discussion of the origin of
such turbulence was avoided. Instead of attempting to derive @xmath from
a turbulence model, Shakura @xmath Sunyaev adopted a ground-breaking
parametrisation for the viscosity based on dimensional considerations:
@xmath . (Here @xmath is the isothermal sound speed in the disc and
@xmath is the vertical semi-thickness or typical scale-height). The
magnitude of the viscosity and the efficiency of angular momentum
transport are therefore characterised by only one dimensionless
parameter, @xmath , which is less than, or possibly comparable to, unity
for subsonic turbulence. This simple prescription is valid regardless of
the nature of the stress tensor and allowed for accretion disc ( @xmath
-)models to be constructed by bypassing the discussion on the origin of
turbulent viscosity.

In years that followed the publication of Shakura and Sunyaev’s
influential paper, many attempts to isolate instabilities capable of
giving rise to turbulent processes were carried out (see review by
Papaloizou & Lin 1995 ) . However, only in 1991 a promising mechanism
was re-discovered and applied to accretion discs. The idea of Balbus &
Hawley ( 1991 ) involves the action of a hydromagnetic instability
originally discovered by Velikhov ( 1959 ) and Chandrasekhar ( 1960 ) .
The magnetorotational instability (MRI) is the process by which weak
magnetic fields are amplified by differential rotation via axisymmetric
disturbances to the circular motion. The principles and action of this
process can be understood by analysing the behaviour of two fluid
elements of masses @xmath and @xmath moving in two Keplerian orbits
(angular velocity @xmath ) around a central body. The element @xmath is
slightly further away from the centre and therefore has a smaller
orbital speed and larger angular momentum than @xmath . If the system is
permeated by a magnetic field, the magnetic forces will act in such a
way that the fluid elements can be thought of as being connected by a
spring. If the elements are displaced away from each other
perpendicularly to a field line, the attractive magnetic tension acts to
return the elements to their original position in a fashion similar to a
spring under tension. This force acts to pull back the element rotating
faster, @xmath , while @xmath is pushed forward. The torque acting on
the former/latter is therefore negative/positive implying a loss/gain of
angular momentum, that is, the angular momentum of @xmath is transferred
outwards to @xmath . This process is unstable because the loss of @xmath
makes it move closer to the central mass while @xmath moves further away
since @xmath . The tension becomes stronger, the torques larger, and the
outward transfer of angular momentum unstoppable (until, of course,
reconnection and other forms of dissipation enter the picture and
control the amplification of the magnetic field). A more detailed
explanation of the MRI and its role in the outward transfer of angular
momentum can be found in, e.g., Balbus & Hawley ( 1998 ) .

Notwithstanding this important step towards the understanding of
accretion, in practice it is common to simply use the traditional
Shakura–Sunyaev formula to describe viscous torques. It is widely
accepted that discs are indeed turbulent, permeated by magnetic fields
and dynamically unstable to axisymmetric disturbances. However, in many
problems of interest, it is enough to keep these ideas in the back of
one’s mind and use a simple viscosity prescription (which, should be
noted, is not incompatible with MRI turbulence) and hydrodynamic
equations to describe accretion discs. Indeed, magnetic fields and
turbulence are not directly taken into account in the calculations made
throughout this thesis. (The range of length- and time-scales addressed
could not be covered by the 3D numerical simulations required to account
for MRI turbulence.) Despite its many simplifying assumptions, including
the ones just mentioned, the Shakura–Sunyaev model is still the standard
reference for the structure of steady accretion discs today. It is
described in detail in the following section.

##### 1.1.2 Standard model

The description of the Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) model made here is a
short review of the work presented in the original paper, in Frank
et al. ( 2002 ) , Pringle ( 1981 ) , Blaes ( 2003 ) and in Ogilvie (
2005 ) . The basic equations and assumptions of the model are described
but the reader should refer to the mentioned articles for a more
detailed discussion. In this section (and throughout this thesis),
cylindrical coordinates @xmath are used to describe discs. The mid-plane
is at @xmath while the central mass is at @xmath .

###### Set of equations and assumptions

In the famous Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) hydrodynamic model, the disc is
assumed to be geometrically thin. This is the natural assumption
originating from the qualitative picture of a rotating cloud of gas: the
gravitational attraction of the central mass and the centrifugal force
provide the dominant balance. The collective effects of the fluid, such
as pressure, viscosity or turbulence, are weak and as a result particles
in the gravitational field follow approximately Keplerian orbits,
assumed to be circular and coplanar. Standard discs are
non-self-gravitating with a total mass negligible when compared to the
mass of the central object (which is not significantly altered due to
accretion). The mass accretion rate is taken to be constant or slowly
varying and the time for accretion is slow compared to other
characteristic time scales in the disc. Therefore, Shakura–Sunyaev discs
are cool and optically thick since there is enough time available for
the gravitational energy released due to accretion to dissipate.

Many astrophysical objects can be treated as fluids because the typical
collisional mean free path of microscopic particles is considerably
smaller than the macroscopic length scale associated with such objects.
Accretion discs are no exception and are typically described using
fluid-dynamical equations. In general, the hydrodynamic equations
describing mass and momentum conservation in the flow can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the density, pressure and velocity
of the fluid, respectively, @xmath is the gravitational potential and
@xmath is the stress tensor. The only stress component relevant in an
axisymmetric system characterised by circular orbital motion is @xmath ,
i.e., it is given by the dynamic viscosity, @xmath , times the shear
rate. The radially-outward transfer of angular momentum is described by
the azimuthal component of ( 1.2 ). This is the angular momentum
conservation equation.

The thin-disc approximation is equivalent to assuming that the disc
material lies very close to the mid-plane @xmath . The hydrodynamic
equations are then dramatically simplified. The small @xmath ratio of
the disc implies that vertically-integrated quantities can be used to
describe its radial structure. In an axisymmetric flow, the vertical
integration of equations ( 1.1 ) and the @xmath component of ( 1.2 )
results in (e.g. Pringle 1981 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

are the vertically-integrated (surface) density, the (density-weighted)
mean radial velocity and the (density-weighted) mean kinematic
viscosity, respectively ¹ ¹ 1 Note that equation ( 1.4 ) assumes @xmath
. The consistency of this approximation is verified later on in this
section. . In practice the integrals will extend from the lower disc
boundary @xmath to the upper boundary @xmath . Throughout this section,
@xmath but the reader should be aware that this is not the case in
general since @xmath is a pressure or density scaleheight while @xmath
is the actual disc vertical boundary; the exact relation between @xmath
and @xmath is dependent on the disc’s vertical structure.

The time for accretion may be taken to be much larger than the dynamical
(orbital) time, @xmath , so that the disc can be treated as quasi-steady
for the purpose of determining its radial structure. (Note that this is
just a simplifying assumption and does not hold in every system.) The
equations (now in @xmath only) then simplify to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the constant mass accretion rate. To obtain this
equation a couple of assumptions were made. The angular velocity @xmath
was taken to be Keplerian, @xmath , implying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In addition, to integrate the angular momentum equation, the location
where viscous torques vanish was taken to be the inner disc radius,
@xmath .

For a general rotation curve, @xmath , the 1D angular momentum
conservation equation ( 1.4 ) in the steady state may be integrated to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the specific angular momentum and @xmath ; @xmath is the
angular momentum constant, that is, the value of @xmath at the radius
where the viscous torque is zero. Throughout this thesis I assume that
this is indeed the location where the disc terminates ( Paczyński 2000 ;
Afshordi & Paczyński 2003 ) .

The remaining components of the momentum equation ( 1.2 ) are simple. In
the vertical direction the dominant balance is gravity vs. pressure,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

By expanding the gravitational potential about @xmath , it is simple to
verify that the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the square of the vertical epicyclic frequency. This is
the frequency at which a particle oscillates about its original orbit
when it suffers a vertical perturbation; if the perturbation is radial,
the characteristic frequency is the radial epicyclic frequency @xmath .
In a Keplerian disc,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

An order of magnitude analysis of ( 1.12 ) shows that an appropriate
formula for the typical scaleheight of the disc is @xmath . From this
definition for @xmath it is easy to see that @xmath . This means that
angular momentum is transferred radially outwards at a rate which is
taken to be proportional to the total pressure, with the efficiency of
the process being parametrised by a dimensionless quantity @xmath .
Moreover, ( 1.9 ) implies @xmath . This definition for the stress tensor
is a common modification to that presented in the original
Shakura–Sunyaev paper where @xmath . The difference between the two
stress prescriptions, @xmath and @xmath , is even more evident when the
angular velocity is not Keplerian in which case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The use of this expression for @xmath may result in significant changes
in the mathematical character of the sonic critical point of steady
flows ( Abramowicz & Kato 1989 ) . This critical point is present when
the radial inflow velocity, neglected in the Shakura–Sunyaev model, is
considered. The differences between the two types of stress tensor will
be discussed in Part II of the thesis where I’ll refer to @xmath as the
@xmath type stress tensor and to @xmath as the diffusion-type stress (
Kato et al. 1993 ) .

In the radial direction, the thin disc approximation results in the
dominant balance being centrifugal,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

since the radial pressure gradient is negligible and @xmath . This
implies that the azimuthal component of the velocity is, to a good
approximation, equal to the orbital velocity of a test particle: @xmath
as assumed previously. In a Keplerian disc, the thin disc assumption
then implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., the azimuthal flow is supersonic which justifies the neglect of
the radial pressure gradient term since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

To fully determine the disc’s radial structure, energy considerations
have to be taken into account. In traditional models, the gas in the
disc is heated by viscous dissipation and cooled effectively by
radiative diffusion through the vertical boundaries. The energy balance
can be written in the form ( Frank et al. 2002 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radiative flux. Owing to the thin disc
approximation, the temperature gradient @xmath is essentially vertical
so @xmath can be written as (e.g. Kippenhahn & Weigert 1996 ) ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant and @xmath is the
Rosseland mean opacity.

Another characteristic feature of the Shakura–Sunyaev analysis is the
crude treatment of the disc’s vertical structure, which is in fact
neglected for the purpose of calculating the radial variation of fluid’s
quantities. If the disc is isothermal in the vertical direction,
integration of ( 1.12 ) shows that the density drops rapidly with
height. This justifies a local treatment of the disc’s structure which
is taken to be governed by the fluid’s quantities in the mid-plane. In
this case: @xmath , @xmath (with @xmath and @xmath related by the
isothermal sound speed, @xmath ) and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath can be interpreted as the disc’s density and
temperature in the mid-plane, respectively. The energy balance equation
can then be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where it was assumed that the disc’s central temperature is
significantly larger than its surface temperature.

In summary, in the traditional model, the disc’s radial structure is
described by the following set of equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before going on to solve these equations, a discussion regarding the
inner disc boundary is in order since @xmath is present in @xmath and a
mention to its exact location was avoided. In fact, discs around
different objects have different inner radii. A disc surrounding a
weakly magnetised star may extend to the stellar surface where a thin
viscous boundary layer mediates the transition between the disc’s
angular velocity and the stellar rotation. On the other hand, when the
star is strongly magnetised, the disc terminates at the magnetospheric
radius beyond which the accretion flow follows the magnetic field lines.
In accretion discs around black holes the situation is once more
different. One of the fundamental results of the theory of general
relativity is the existence of an innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)
or marginally stable orbit , @xmath , for test particles around a black
hole; e.g. for a non-rotating black hole, @xmath (three Schwarzschild
radii). This implies that a black-hole accretion disc cannot extend to
the event horizon ² ² 2 The work of Kluźniak & Wagoner ( 1985 ) showed
that in the case of neutron stars with “soft” equations of state, the
marginally stable orbit may lie outside the stellar surface in which
case the disc would terminate there as it happens with black holes. The
exact equation of state of real neutron stars is, however, uncertain.
Therefore, here I will assume that neutron stars are described by
“stiff” equations of state in which case the classic picture of the disc
extending to the stellar surface holds. . For radii larger than @xmath
the orbits are stable and a viscous torque is required to transport mass
inwards. On the other hand, for @xmath orbits are unstable and no
viscosity is necessary to make the gas spiral rapidly towards the black
hole. The inner boundary can therefore be assumed to be @xmath (the
equality is only exact in a pressureless disc where @xmath ). This is
the radius where the specific angular momentum and binding energy of a
test particle reach a minimum.

###### The three disc regions

To close the system of equations two final ingredients are needed: a
relation for the opacity @xmath and an equation of state @xmath . The
former will depend on the processes that contribute to the opacity: if
electron scattering is dominant, @xmath is given by the constant Thomson
opacity, @xmath . On the other hand, if free-free absorption is
dominant, opacity is approximately determined by the Kramers formula,
@xmath (e.g. Frank et al. 2002 ; Kippenhahn & Weigert 1996 ) . In
general, a combination of the two should be considered. As for the
equation of state, discs may be assumed to be composed of both gas and
radiation in which case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

were @xmath is the Boltzmann constant, @xmath is the mean molecular
weight and @xmath is the proton mass.

The full consideration of all the processes that contribute to the
opacity and to the total pressure gives rise to a complicated disc
structure. In the Shakura–Sunyaev approach the analysis is simplified by
considering the disc to be composed of three parts: in the innermost
regions, (a) and (b), electron scattering is the main contribution to
the opacity while free-free absorption is dominant in the outer region
(c). In (a) the pressure is determined by the radiation pressure (
@xmath ) while gas pressure ( @xmath ) dominates in (b) and (c). The
radiation-dominated region exists only at very high temperatures, when
the accretion rate is larger than a few percent of the Eddington
accretion rate (necessary to sustain the Eddington luminosity @xmath ),
being important in accretion discs around black holes.

Assuming that in all three regions the stress scales with the total
pressure , the disc structure may be described by
Region (a):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Region (b):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Region (c):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all quantities are in CGS units, @xmath , @xmath (in units of the
gravitational radius) and @xmath . The Eddington accretion rate is given
by @xmath , and is calculated assuming an “accretion efficiency” @xmath
appropriate for a Schwarzschild black hole; @xmath is the cross-section
for Thomson scattering. The fluid’s quantities have exactly the same
dependencies in @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as in the
original Shakura–Sunyaev model. The differences in the numerical factors
are due to the small difference in the values used for @xmath and @xmath
, to the different normalization of radius, and also because here I
consider the @xmath component of the stress tensor, @xmath , to be
@xmath instead of the usual @xmath value. The remaining quantities,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , may be easily determined from the formulas
above.

Despite neglecting to treat the vertical structure of the disc, not
considering other contributions to the cooling and heating rates of the
gas besides radiation and viscous heating, and despite the simple
parametrization for the angular momentum transfer, the Shakura–Sunyaev
model is still the standard reference for the radial structure of
accretion discs if gas pressure is dominant. Region (a) has always been
more problematic. In fact, the assumption that stress scales with the
total pressure in the radiation pressure dominated regime leads to
viscous and thermal instabilities, analysed further in the following
section.

###### Instabilities

Soon after the publication of the standard thin disc models, some
authors ( Lightman & Eardley 1974 ; Shakura & Sunyaev 1976 ) pointed out
that, with the usual viscosity prescription, the very inner (a) region
is subject to instabilities acting on the viscous and thermal timescales
of the disc.

To study instabilities the time-dependence of the hydrodynamic equations
needs to be restored. Equations ( 1.3 ) and ( 1.4 ) may then be combined
into a diffusion equation describing the viscous evolution of a thin
disc,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where Keplerian rotation was assumed. From equation ( 1.26 ) it can be
seen that, at fixed radius, the viscosity depends only on the surface
density, @xmath . Therefore, if @xmath (initially independent of @xmath
for a disc in equilibrium) is perturbed slightly, @xmath , the viscosity
@xmath with @xmath . The viscous evolution equation can then be written
as ( Pringle 1981 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the variation of @xmath with @xmath was assumed slow. If @xmath ,
the diffusion coefficient is negative implying that overdense regions
are constantly fed with more material while underdense regions become
more and more rarified, i.e., the disc breaks up into rings; this is the
condition for instability. In region (a) of the Shakura and Sunyaev
model, it is simple to see from equations ( 1.23 )–( 1.28 ) that, at
fixed @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath showing that the region is indeed viscously unstable.

The characteristic timescale for this secular instability is the
timescale for the radial motion (accretion) in the disc ( Pringle 1981 )
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a thin disc, a faster timescale corresponds to the time for
establishing vertical thermal balance which can be estimated by dividing
the thermal energy content per unit area by the dissipation rate,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the characteristic timescale of the thermal instability; for
@xmath , @xmath .

During the very short thermal time, the surface density remains
practically constant and the disc is maintained in hydrostatic
equilibrium. Therefore, it may be considered that in equations ( 1.23
)–( 1.28 ) only @xmath and @xmath (and therefore @xmath ) vary with
time. From the energy balance equation ( 1.27 ), the heating and cooling
rates may be defined to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. In region (a) the opacity is constant so that @xmath . On
the other hand, using ( 1.28 ) and the first part of ( 1.24 ), the
heating rate can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dependence of @xmath on @xmath can be determined from the
hydrostatic equilibrium equation and ( 1.23 ), @xmath , and therefore
@xmath when the radiation pressure dominates. From the dependence of
@xmath and @xmath it is seen that a small increase in temperature will
lead to a thermal runaway since the heating rate increases much faster
than the cooling rate. This is the basis of the thermal instability.

According to the Shakura–Sunyaev model, these instabilities would be
expected in discs with a luminosity larger than a few percent of the
Eddington luminosity. However, and despite attempts to explain the
variability of some observational objects using these instabilities (
Blaes 2003 , and references therein) , their presence in real systems
has never been proven. With the exception of GRS 1915+105, a very
unusual and extremely luminous source, observations of X-ray binaries
with @xmath have failed to identify such instabilities ( Gierliński &
Done 2004 ) . Pringle ( 1981 ) pointed out that they are not necessarily
physical and may rather be regarded as “self-inconsistencies”: some of
the approximations made in order to construct the steady disc model may
not be consistent with the assumption of steadiness. Indeed, these can
be avoided by simply assuming that the stresses scale with the gas
pressure ( Sakimoto & Coroniti 1981 ) , or with a combination of both
gas and radiation pressure (e.g. Taam & Lin 1984 ; Merloni & Fabian 2002
) . Still, recent magnetohydrodynamic simulations by Hirose et al. (
2009 ) suggest that turbulent stresses (magnetic in nature) may indeed
be correlated with the total pressure as predicted in the original
model. However, fluctuations in stress are the ones driving pressure
fluctuations, contrary to the usual assumption that changes in pressure
give rise to changes in stress; this seems to avoid thermal instability
(which has a faster growth rate than viscous instability). With these
results in mind, throughout this thesis, I consider the @xmath viscosity
prescription in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the viscosity @xmath and total pressure @xmath correlate, as in
the original Shakura & Sunyaev model.

Another instability of viscous flows, one potentially relevant for
explaining quasi-periodic variability, was investigated by Kato (1978).
This pulsational instability or viscous overstability (since it takes
the form of propagating waves) has a growth rate lower than that of
thermal instability by a factor @xmath , where @xmath is the wavelength
of the perturbations. Viscous overstability is further discussed in Part
II of this thesis.

##### 1.1.3 Beyond the standard model

###### Radial inflow: steady transonic accretion

In the standard thin disc model, the gravitational attraction of the
central object is balanced by rotation and the radial inflow is ignored
to lowest order. The disc structure calculated within these assumptions
is singular at the inner boundary ( @xmath ) where the disc is forced to
terminate since the density in region (a) goes to infinity there [cf.
equation ( 1.31 )]. The singularity is removed if the radial inflow is
taken into account. This is particularly important in discs around black
holes: as noted by (e.g.) Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) , accretion is
always transonic in this case since the flow must be subsonic at large
radii and supersonic close to the compact object. As a result, the
radial velocity is dynamically important in the inner disc.

Liang & Thompson ( 1980 ) developed a more correct treatment of the
innermost region of steady flows and demonstrated that the solution for
the radial velocity of thin-disc accretion onto a black hole is
transonic and analogous to Bondi ( 1952 ) spherical accretion. It should
be noted that the transonic accretion model is only relevant very close
to the marginally stable orbit and in the plunging supersonic region.
The Shakura–Sunyaev model is still applicable a certain distance away
from the inner boundary and the transonic solution should be matched
with the classical thin-disc solution at large radii.

The point where the modulus of the radial inflow equals the sound speed
is a critical point of the hydrodynamic equations describing 1D steady
accretion; a physically acceptable solution must pass through this sonic
point regularly. In a thin disc, this critical location is close to the
marginally stable orbit and it is approximately where the gas transits
from being in stable orbits to freely falling into the black hole. The
exact location of this inner boundary is dependent on the flow
parameters such as mass accretion rate and viscosity ( Muchotrzeb &
Paczyński 1982 ) .

As it will be seen in chapter 2 , transonic accretion is constrained by
boundary conditions and regularity demands at the sonic point. For some
values of the flow parameters such as sound speed and @xmath , steady
transonic solutions obeying realistic conditions cannot be found,
implying the time variability of the accretion process. Indeed, e.g.,
Paczyński ( 1987 ) attempted to relate the unsteadiness of the flow to
the X-ray quasi-periodic phenomena. This hypothesis is studied in Part
II of this thesis where I analyse the transition from subsonic to
supersonic accretion in a time-dependent flow.

###### Thick discs and ADAFs

The Eddington luminosity is the limit at which the inward gravitational
force is exactly balanced by the outward radiation force. This concept
is particularly meaningful in the inner regions of accretion flows
around neutron stars or black holes where the gas is heated to high
enough temperature for radiation pressure to dominate over gas pressure.
In this case, the equations derived to describe region (a) are
applicable and ( 1.30 ) appropriately conveys the dependency of the disc
thickness on the mass accretion rate, independently of the viscosity
prescription. It is then clear [since @xmath in region (a)] that if the
accretion rate is close to Eddington, the thin disc approximation must
break down.

The interest in thick discs arose in an attempt to explain these “puffed
up” structures or tori relevant for high luminosity accretion flows or
that may result from thermal and viscous instabilities in thin discs (
Paczyński & Wiita 1980 ; Abramowicz et al. 1980 ) . Accretion tori were
used to model the very inner accretion flow in AGNs and seemed to
provide the necessary energy by accretion for jets and a mechanism for
their collimation without the need for magnetic fields ( Lynden-Bell
1978 ) . These thick structures may also be relevant in inefficiently
cooling flows where the gas is heated to temperatures such that the
local sound speed becomes comparable to the azimuthal velocity [cf.
equation ( 1.17 )].

Since radiation pressure forces are important in defining the radial
equilibrium of the disc, there is no reason to assume that the rotation
is Keplerian [cf. equation ( 1.16 )]. In principle, there is freedom to
chose the distribution of specific angular momentum, provided it does
not decrease outwards so that Rayleigh’s criterion for stability to
axisymmetric perturbations is satisfied. The typical assumption was that
of constant angular momentum; this is not only the simplest distribution
but is also the one for which the total luminosity of the flow is
maximal ( Abramowicz et al. 1980 ) . Models constructed with this
assumption are, however, dynamically unstable to global non-axisymmetric
modes as discovered by Papaloizou & Pringle ( 1984 ) .

The key location for the development of the Papaloizou-Pringle
instability (PPI) is the corotation radius, located within the torus for
non-axisymmetric modes. If a wave of frequency @xmath and azimuthal
number @xmath (cf. chapter 4 ) propagates in a disc rotating with
angular velocity @xmath , the wave pattern will appear, to an inertial
observer, with a Doppler-shifted wave frequency @xmath ; the location
where @xmath is the corotation radius, @xmath . Waves propagating
outside corotation have @xmath while @xmath for waves propagating inside
@xmath . Because the flow is rotating and there is kinetic energy stored
in the disc as a result of this rotation, it is possible for a wave
propagating in such a medium to have negative energy. This simply means
that the total energy of wave+disc is smaller than the energy of the
disc on its own; the wave passage decreases the mechanical energy of the
gas. This is the case for waves propagating inside their corotation
radius as opposed to positive-energy waves that propagate outside (cf.
chapter 5 ). At the corotation resonance, energy exchanges may occur. If
negative-energy waves lose energy there their amplitude is increased
since they become more energetically negative. Positive-energy waves may
collect this energy left at corotation and grow in amplitude as a
result. The process leads to instability if negative-energy waves are
reflected at the inner boundary of the torus so that the energy exchange
at corotation is maintained ( Balbus & Hawley 1998 ) .

The instability acts on the very fast dynamical timescale and persists
even in flows with non-constant distributions of specific angular
momentum ( Papaloizou & Pringle 1985 ) . The growth is maximal for
constant @xmath ( @xmath ) and decreases rapidly as the Keplerian
distribution ( @xmath ) is approached ( Goldreich et al. 1986 ) . The
discovery of the PPI was striking and threw into doubt the very
existence of thick discs. However, it was later shown by Blaes ( 1987 )
and confirmed by numerical simulations ( Balbus & Hawley 1998 , and
references therein) that the growth of the instability may be reduced or
even halted in accreting flows where an inward radial velocity is taken
into account. Thick accretion discs may indeed be astrophysically
relevant but there are still theoretical uncertainties regarding their
structure and stability.

Another interesting accretion solution is that of advective-dominated
accretion flows or ADAFs. They are important when the accreting gas is
unable to cool efficiently and most of the thermal energy is advected
inwards by accretion of entropy instead of being radiated away. They are
expected to have astrophysical relevance in situations where the mass
accretion rate is either very low or very high (see examples in Narayan
& Yi 1994 ) . Although these solutions are “thick” in the sense that
@xmath is not necessarily small and the pressure gradient should be
included in the radial momentum equation, they may not be unstable to
PPI due to the presence of radial advection.

The most widely accepted model for accretion flows around black holes
involves both an ADAF and a thin disc ( Narayan et al. 1996 ) .
Accretion at large radii occurs by means of a thin disc (possibly
surrounded by a hot corona) which then switches, at a transition radius
@xmath , to an advection-dominated flow which dominates in the inner
regions; the exact location of @xmath is dependent on the mass accretion
rate. This model has spectral characteristics in agreement with those
observed for X-ray binaries ( Narayan et al. 1998 , and references
therein) . Moreover, and despite the complications involved in defining
black-hole states and transitions from one to another (cf. section 1.3.1
), an elegant and simple theoretical model differentiates the various
states by using different transition radii for each of them. The highest
state, dominating close to the Eddington limit, has the highest
accretion rate and smallest @xmath with accretion occurring almost
exclusively by means of a thin disc ( Esin et al. 1997 , and Fig. 1.1 )
. A more recent version of this state-transition model is presented in
Done et al. ( 2007 ) .

###### Warped and eccentric discs

In the classical theory of accretion discs the gas is assumed to rotate
around a massive central object following coplanar, circular and
approximately Keplerian orbits. Although this is the simplest solution
for the motion of fluid elements placed in a Newtonian potential well,
external forces can give rise to non-planar discs composed of
non-circular rings. In fact, the general solution allows for discs to be
twisted or tilted, with their orbits presenting a smoothly varying
eccentricity and/or inclination. The literature offers strong
observational and theoretical evidence ( Bardeen & Petterson 1975 ;
Ogilvie 2000 , 2001 ; Fragile et al. 2007 , and references therein) to
believe that under various conditions discs can become either warped or
eccentric. In particular, the precession of deformed discs has been used
to explain several phenomena in X-ray binaries (e.g. Gerend & Boynton
1976 ; Whitehurst 1988 ; Stella & Vietri 1998 ; Lai 1999 ) .

Warped and eccentric discs are described further in chapter 4 , where
warping and eccentricity are described as global modes, and in chapter 6
where the conditions under which global deformations may appear and
propagate to the inner disc region are analysed in more detail.

#### 1.2 Astrophysical black holes

The short discussion on the location of the inner disc boundary of the
previous section, emphasised the importance of accretion discs in
distinguishing between neutron stars and black holes. More importantly,
because black holes themselves cannot emit light (apart from Hawking
radiation), observations can only reveal the emission from the accretion
discs. Therefore, accretion flows are fundamental tools in the search
for black-hole candidates and they also provide means to determine
properties of the central object, namely, black-hole mass and spin. In
this section I discuss the search for, and characterisation of,
astrophysical black holes and the importance of accretion discs in this
process.

##### 1.2.1 Black-hole candidates

To a certain extent stars come in all shapes and sizes or, more
precisely and contrary to the popular belief, they are not necessarily
exactly spherically or axially symmetric since magnetic fields and
rotation may affect their symmetry. However, according to stellar
evolution, some stars will end their lives as black holes and the vacuum
solutions of Einstein’s general relativity equations that describe these
objects are highly symmetric. If the star is sufficiently massive and
non-rotating it is expected to collapse to a Schwarzschild black hole
which is spherically symmetric. On the other hand, a rotating massive
star is expected to end its life as a Kerr black hole which is
characterised by the electrically-neutral axially-symmetric solution of
Einstein field equations. (Charged black holes described by the
Reissner-Nordström solution are not expected to exist in nature as such
a body would attract opposite charges and be neutralised as a
consequence.) Is there a contradiction between the theories of stellar
evolution and general relativity or can a non-symmetric star collapse
onto a highly symmetric body? General relativity provides a solution for
the apparent contradiction by stating that during the collapse the
compact object gets rid of its asymmetry by radiating away gravitational
waves. This can be proved mathematically by studying the evolution of
small non-axially symmetric perturbations of the gravitational field
during the collapse process. While this provides a theoretically
satisfying solution for the paradox between stellar evolution and
general relativity, both theories are yet to be fully tested
observationally. The proof of the existence of Kerr black holes (the
Schwarzschid solution can be included as a special case) in nature
constitutes one of the fundamental observational tests of these
theories. A more detailed description of black holes in general
relativity can be found in, e.g., Raine & Thomas ( 2005 ) .

Astrophysical black holes may be divided in four categories depending on
their mass (see Raine & Thomas 2005 , and references therein) .
Cosmology theorises mini-black holes with @xmath to have formed in the
early Universe when very high densities prevailed. These objects could
presumably be detected since they are predicted to emit gamma rays
during evaporation due to Hawking radiation, which would contribute to
the cosmic gamma-ray background. Measurements so far are limited and
inconclusive. Stellar-mass black holes, @xmath , are the endpoint of
stellar evolution of massive stars and the earliest observational
evidence of such type of objects comes from X-ray observations of binary
star systems. Intermediate-mass black holes, @xmath , are probably
formed by collision and/or merging of stellar-mass black holes. Highly
luminous compact X-ray sources emitting 10-100 times more power in
X-rays than stellar-mass black hole candidates have been identified.
Such a release of energy can be explained if black holes power these
objects. They have mostly been identified in starburst (rapid stellar
formation) galaxies. Finally, the most spectacular supermassive black
holes power active galactic nuclei or AGN ( @xmath ). In the so-called
“active galaxies” an enormous amount of energy is released from a small
volume at their centres and their high luminosity can only be reasonably
explained by accretion onto a black hole.

The earliest and probably strongest evidence of the existence of black
holes in the Universe comes from observations of binary stars. From the
number of binaries known in our Galaxy that consist of a visible
(normal) star and an invisible (dark) companion in close orbit, in
approximately 20 the dark star is believed to be a black hole (
McClintock & Remillard 2006 ) . When fusion of elements in the stellar
interior ceases to release energy the star begins to die. According to
the theory of stellar evolution, a lower-mass star sheds its envelope
into a planetary nebula and the resulting compact degenerate remnant is
a white dwarf. Higher-mass stars produce a supernova as a result of
collapse. The remnant from this violent explosion is either a neutron
star of black hole. In a white dwarf the inward pulling gravity is
balanced by electron degeneracy pressure while a neutron star is
supported by neutron degeneracy pressure. If the mass of the neutron
star is larger than @xmath the pressure is insufficient to prevent
gravitational collapse, the radius of the star eventually becomes
smaller than its Schwarzschild radius and a black hole forms.

The invisible companion in a close binary system can be one of the three
endpoints of stellar evolution. If its observationally-determined mass
is larger than @xmath , it is considered a black-hole candidate (BHC).
From orbital theory, the mass-function of a binary may be found to be
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the orbital period, @xmath is the amplitude of the
line-of-sight velocity, @xmath and @xmath are the masses of the normal
star and its dark companion, respectively and @xmath is the angle
between the line-of-sight and the normal to the orbital plane. The mass
function can be determined observationally and is a lower limit to the
mass of the dark companion. Therefore, if @xmath an object is considered
a black-hole candidate.

A high X-ray luminosity originating from the inner accretion flow is
also a good indication of the existence of a black hole. In the
strong-field region (approximately between @xmath ) where most of the
gravitational energy is released, temperatures are of @xmath and
emission is in the X-ray part of the spectrum. If the high-energy
spectra and temporal variability of an object are similar to other BHC,
it can also be identified as a candidate. X-ray variability is discussed
further in section 1.3 .

The absolute proof of the existence of black holes would be the
detection of an event horizon. Even if such a region cannot be “seen”,
observations of neutron-star binaries and black-hole binaries (BHB) may
be compared to look for signatures of a surface in the former. Because
the accretion disc extends to the surface of neutron stars, once the gas
reaches it, it accumulates there and its kinetic energy is converted
into heat. Then it eventually undergoes thermonuclear burning due to the
gravitational compression of the gas onto the surface. The burning can
be unstable in which case thermonuclear bursts occur. This phenomenon
has been observed in neutron star binaries but not in black hole
candidates (McClintock et al. 2003), re-inforcing its identification as
such (since black holes have no surface thermonuclear burning cannot
happen).

##### 1.2.2 Measuring black-hole spin

For general relativity to be tested observationally, the identification
of black holes isn’t enough. It is necessary to show that the space
around them may be described by the Kerr metric which is characterised
fully by only two parameters, the mass and the spin of the black hole.
Given that most BHCs have determined or constrained masses, the next
logical step is to measure spin, which is of more fundamental importance
than mass. The latter simply gives a scale while the former changes the
geometry of the space-time in the vicinity of the black hole; knowing
the spin is essential to model how an accreting black hole interacts
with its surroundings. Besides being important in testing general
relativity, spin measurements would, e.g., allow us to build more
realistic models of black-hole formation and black-hole binary
evolution, to make models of relativistic jets which suggest a
dependence on spin and to test stellar-collapse models of gamma-ray
bursts.

However, measuring the spin of a black hole is much harder than
determining its mass. While the latter can be measured in the Newtonian
limit (using the stellar companion), the effects of spin are only
revealed in the strong gravity regime, i.e., very close to the black
hole in the very inner region of the accretion disc. According to
general relativity, only certain values are expected for the spin of a
black hole. Defining a dimensionless spin parameter @xmath where @xmath
is the angular momentum of the hole, the cosmic censorship hypothesis
(which says that naked singularities cannot exist in the Universe)
limits the values of @xmath to be between @xmath and @xmath . Negative
values correspond to a black hole rotating retrogradely with respect to
the accretion disc (or binary rotation) and can be excluded for
simplicity. If @xmath , the event horizon of a black hole rotates at the
speed of light. In reality, “extreme-Kerr holes” are impossible: Thorne
( 1974 ) proved that the maximum rotation value is limited to @xmath .

The location of the marginally stable orbit and the accretion efficiency
are dependent on spin. In a non-rotating black hole the binding energy
released when a particle spirals inwards to the marginally stable orbit
is 6 per cent and @xmath . On the other hand, in a maximally-rotating
hole the efficiency is 30 per cent and @xmath which is also the radius
of the event horizon. As a result, the orbital frequencies associated to
@xmath are also dependent on spin. For a Schwarzschild black hole @xmath
Hz; for a maximally rotating Kerr black hole this value increases to
@xmath Hz. These differences are crucial for some observational
determinations of spin.

###### Methods of spin measurement

There are currently four promising methods for the observational
determination of black-hole spin. I summarise each one in what follows.

X-ray polarimetry: Polarisation features can be strongly affected by
general relativistic effects ( Connors et al. 1980 ) . The idea is based
on the assumption that high energy photons are expected to come from
closer to the black hole than low energy ones. Because of the strong
gravitational bending of light rays, as the photon energy increases, the
plane of linear polarisation swings gradually through an angle which is
dependent on spin. Therefore, spin can be determined from the parameters
characterising the polarised accretion disc spectra.

Iron line profile: The prominent Fe K @xmath X-ray spectral line has its
origin in the gas orbiting close to the hole and is relativistically
broadened. Doppler and general relativistic redshifts, frame-dragging
and relativistic beaming contribute to create an asymmetric line
profile. In principle, mass, angular momentum of the black hole and
orientation of the accretion disc can be determined from these line
profiles ( Reynolds & Nowak 2003 ) .

Continuum fitting: Thin discs around black holes are truncated at the
marginally stable orbit, which is dependent on mass and spin. If mass is
known in advance, a measure of @xmath provides a measure of spin ( Zhang
et al. 1997 ) . Using blackbody radiation theory, radii of stars can be
determined from the radiation flux @xmath received from the star and the
temperature @xmath of the continuum radiation, provided the distance
@xmath is known (luminosity @xmath ). In a similar way, @xmath can be
measured from the radius of the “hole” of the disc emission. But it
should be mentioned that a slightly more complicated formula is used to
determine this radius to, e.g., consider the @xmath profile of discs and
take into account the disc inclination @xmath .

High-frequency QPOs: These high-frequency modulations seen in the light
curve of some black-hole candidates have spectra characteristic of the
inner disc and very stable frequencies, insensitive to luminosity
variations. This suggests that their frequencies are primarily dependent
on the fundamental properties of the black hole, @xmath and @xmath ,
rather than the properties of the accretion flow. Provided there is a
theoretical model for the frequencies of QPOs, only the mass of the hole
is necessary to determine its spin (see, e.g., van der Klis 2006 , and
section 1.3.3 ) .

###### Spin-measurement critique

X-ray polarimetry is one of the methods for spin measurement where
theoretical methods are developed the most, with computational models
that compute the Stokes parameters of a polarised accretion disc
spectrum already available ( Dovčiak et al. 2004 ) . However, very
sensitive instruments need to be built to measure polarimetric
information and thus far this method has produced no results.

The iron line profile method, on the other hand, has already produced
some results. Observations indicate that, e.g., the black-hole candidate
GRS 1915+105 is slowly spinning while XTE J1650–500, XTE J1655–40, XTE