Accretion discs are fluid-dynamical entities which surround many black
holes. Observations reveal that these systems exhibit variability on a
range of time scales. This thesis investigates phenomena occurring in
black-hole accretion discs which are likely to induce high-frequency
quasi-periodic variability. Two classes of pseudo-relativistic
theoretical models are investigated.

The first is based on the stability of transonic accretion flows and its
connection to a disc instability that takes the form of propagating
waves (viscous overstability). The time-dependent study looks at the
conditions under which the transition between subsonic disc-like
accretion, which occurs at large radii, and the supersonic flow
characteristic of the immediate vicinity of the black hole is stable. In
agreement with previous findings, results indicate that the system
reaches a steady state for low viscosity. Above that threshold the
transonic solutions are unstable to viscous overstability. The
overstable inertial-acoustic waves appear to be excited near the maximum
of the epicyclic frequency and are global in the sense that their
frequency is maintained for a wide range of radii.

The second class of models looks at accretion-disc oscillations which
are trapped due to the non-monotonic variation of the epicyclic
frequency in relativistic flows. In particular, it focuses on inertial
waves trapped below the maximum of the epicyclic frequency which are
excited in deformed, warped or eccentric, discs. The excitation
mechanism involves a non-linear coupling between the global deformation,
an intermediate wave and the inertial mode and results, under a variety
of conditions, in growth of the latter. Excitation is only effective
when global deformations are capable of reaching the inner disc with
non-negligible amplitude. With that in mind, the conditions favourable
to the propagation of warped and eccentric modes from the outer to the
inner regions are analysed. Another aspect that is taken into account is
the influence of a transonic background, ignored in the coupling
calculations, on the propagation of modes in the disc. It is found that,
under certain conditions, inertial waves may be severely affected or
destroyed in this background. On the other hand, results indicate that
the decay rate of inertial waves due to the presence of the radial
inflow is small in sufficiently thin discs. In this case, the coupling
mechanism can still work to excite trapped inertial modes.
