Chapter I: The structure and evolution of globular clusters are closely
linked; we propose here to study them simultaneously, with a purely
theoretical approach. The essential hypotheses are: (1) spherical
symmetry; (2) quasi-permanent regime; (3) isotropy of the velocities at
all points; (4) mass equality.

Chapter II: We establish the system of fundamentals equations (2.25).
The cluster model is reduced to a canonic form by a homology
transformation with time-dependent parameters. We will look for a model
of invariable canonic form, that is a model which remains similar to
itself while evolving.

Chapter III: We show that the galactic field imposes the relation (3.8):
the cluster’s radius is proportional to the cube root of its mass.

Chapter IV: Preliminary calculations show that the density must be
infinite at the center of the cluster. We obtain the asymptotic
expression (4.14) for the distribution function near the center. The
conservation of mass imposes condition (4.32). The existence of an
energy flux toward the cluster center is predicted.

Chapter V: The ensemble of equations and conditions obtained in the
preceding chapters forms a system which is resolved numerically by means
of an electronic calculator. We find a unique solution: the “homology
model” [ T.N. : homologous model] (Table 1 , Figures 4 , 5 , 6 , 15 , 16
). Its mass and radius are finite. The outer radius is approximately 10
times the mean radius. The mass decreases linearly as a function of
time. About one-third of the negative energy of the cluster is carried
off by the stars which escape; the other two-thirds accumulate in the
center, in multiple stars.

Chapter VI: We introduce a small number of stars of different mass in
the homology model and we calculate their distribution (Figures 8 and 9
) and their escape rate (Figure 10 ). We find that as their mass
increases, they are more concentrated, and escape less rapidly. In
particular, if their mass is greater than 3/2 the mass of the normal
stars, they are nearly all collected near the center of the cluster, and
their escape rate is zero.

Chapter VII: We show that should the initial central density of a
cluster be finite, it will grow and become infinite within a finite time
(Figure 12 ). We study next the evolution of a cluster differing
slightly from the homology model: we find that the differences
decreases, whatever their form. Thus the homology model is very probably
the final state toward which the clusters tend.

Chapter VIII: The theoretical results are compared with the
observational data on globular clusters. First we construct an
“artificial cluster” (Figures 15 and 16 ) which permits a general
comparison. Then we compare the projected densities in detail, Sandage’s
star counts for the cluster M3, and the brightness measurements for
47 Tuc by Gascoigne & Burr. The agreement is very satisfying (Figures 18
, 19 , 21 ). For the stars of M3, we find a definite mass-luminosity
relation, which however is in disagreement with the relation indicated
by stellar evolution theory (Figure 20 ). The observed masses and radii
are in good agreement with the theoretical relation (Figure 22 ). The
outer radii of the clusters are about twice as large as the observed
radii. The absolute escape rate is constant and equals: @xmath . This
constancy is confirmed by the observed distribution of globular cluster
masses (Figure 23 ). We obtain the initial mass distribution.
Observation shows that @xmath Cen is the only globular cluster whose
central density is not yet infinite. From this we deduce that the age of
the globular clusters must lie between @xmath and @xmath , in good
agreemen [ sic ] with the age deduced from stellar evolution.

Chapter IX: We list a number of directions in which development of
research is to be hoped for.
