This thesis consists of two parts, connected by one central theme: the
dynamics of the “shape of space”. To give the reader some inkling of
what we mean by “shape of space”, consider the fact that the shape of a
triangle is given solely by its three internal angles; its position and
size in ambient space are irrelevant for this ultimately intrinsic
description. Analogously, the shape of a 3-dimensional space is given by
a metric up to coordinate and conformal changes. Considerations of a
relational nature strongly support the development of such dynamical
theories of shape. The first part of the thesis concerns the
construction of a theory of gravity dynamically equivalent to general
relativity (GR) in 3+1 form (ADM). What is special about this theory is
that it does not possess foliation invariance, as does ADM. It replaces
that “symmetry” by another: local conformal invariance. In so doing it
more accurately reflects a theory of the “shape of space”, giving us
reason to call it shape dynamics (SD). Being a very recent development,
the consequences of this radical change of perspective on gravity are
still largely unexplored. In the first part we will try to present some
of the highlights of results so far, and indicate what we can and cannot
do with shape dynamics. Because this is a young, rapidly moving field,
we have necessarily left out some interesting new results which are not
yet in print and were developed alongside the writing of the thesis. The
second part of the thesis will develop a gauge theory for “shape of
space”–theories. To be more precise, if one admits that the physically
relevant observables are given by shape, our descriptions of Nature
carry a lot of redundancy, namely absolute local size and absolute
spatial position. This redundancy is related to the action of the
infinite-dimensional conformal and diffeomorphism groups on the geometry
of space. We will show that the action of these groups can be put into a
language of infinite-dimensional gauge theory, taking place in the
configuration space of 3+1 gravity. In this context gauge connections
acquire new and interesting meanings, and can be used as “relational
tools”.
