Electronically non-adiabatic effects, in which the nuclear motion occurs
on more than one electronic potential energy surface, are of fundamental
importance to numerous branches of chemistry and biology, ranging from
quantum dissipation to photosynthesis. In this thesis I generalize Ring
Polymer Molecular Dynamics (RPMD) rate theory to electronically
non-adiabatic systems, followed by application to two one-dimensional
curve crossing models and a multidimensional spin-boson model.

RPMD rate theory uses the classical isomorphism to model a quantum
mechanical system as many copies of a classical system connected by
harmonic springs, forming a ring polymer necklace. By evolving the ring
polymer with classical molecular dynamics through an extended classical
phase space, the RPMD reaction rate can be calculated. The RPMD rate
captures quantum mechanical effects, is independent of the choice of the
location of the dividing surface between products and reactants, and
reduces to classical rate theory in the high temperature limit. Here I
extend RPMD rate theory to include electronically non-adiabatic effects,
leading to a new expression for the potential energy which the ring
polymer experiences.

Numerous desirable features of the non-adiabatic ring polymer potential
are illustrated, such as physically plausible results in the high
temperature limit for both widely separated and degenerate electronic
states. In the limit of a single electronic potential energy surface the
conventional adiabatic RPMD potential is recovered, and for a system
whose Hamiltonian can be separated into electronically coupled and
electronically independent components, only the electronically coupled
part need be considered using the more computationally demanding
non-adiabatic ring polymer potential.

The generalisation of RPMD rate theory to non-adiabatic systems is then
applied to two one-dimensional Landau-Zener curve crossing models,
initially a symmetric model where the optimum dividing surface is
evident by symmetry, and then an asymmetric model where the optimum
dividing surface is calculated variationally. Thermal RPMD reaction
rates and classical rates are calculated over a wide temperature range
for both the electronically coupled model, and the adiabatic model where
the reactant moves solely on the lower potential energy surface. Exact
quantum rates are also available for comparison. The RPMD reaction rates
are found to agree with exact quantum results roughly to within a factor
of two in the symmetric model, even in deep tunnelling at 100 K, where
the classical rate is in error by many orders of magnitude. For the
asymmetric model, RPMD rate theory is an even better approximation to
the exact quantum rate, and in both cases the departure of the RPMD rate
from the quantum rate in the electronically coupled system is comparable
to that in the adiabatic system.

The spin-boson model is then considered, which consists of a spin system
bilinearly coupled to a harmonic bath. It has applications ranging from
electron transfer in solution to quantum entanglement, and a variety of
quantum exact and approximate reaction rates are available for
comparison. In this thesis the bath is defined by the Debye spectral
density, whose long frequency tail leads to the mass of the reaction
co-ordinate vanishing in the limit of an infinite number of bath modes.

The non-adiabatic form of RPMD rate theory is extended to
multidimensional systems, and the Debye spectral density is found to
present numerous challenges, such as the Quantum Transition State Theory
rate being undefined. However, by an unusual factorisation of the RPMD
reaction rate into the probability density of ring polymer centroids at
the dividing surface and the flux of positive-momentum centroids which
are found in the product region at long time, the RPMD rate is
calculable as the product of two convergent factors. Furthermore, the
RPMD reaction rate is found to be closer to the exact quantum rate than
almost all other approximate methods which are available for comparison.

These results suggest a new methodology for rate calculation of
electronically non-adiabatic systems, whose computational effort scales
linearly with system size, but includes an accurate modelling of
recrossing dynamics and quantum effects.
