###### Contents

-    Abstract
-    Lay Summary
-    List of Acronyms
-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Overview
    -    1.2 Thesis Context
    -    1.3 Thesis Contributions
    -    1.4 Thesis Structure
    -    1.5 The Project
-    2 Motivation and Background
    -    2.1 Overview
    -    2.2 Energy Efficient Base Stations
    -    2.3 Quantifying Energy Efficiency
    -    2.4 Green Radio in Literature
    -    2.5 Technical Background
        -    2.5.1
        -    2.5.2 Multi-carrier Technology
        -    2.5.3 Multiple Antenna Technology
        -    2.5.4 Convex Optimization
        -    2.5.5 Network Simulation
    -    2.6 Summary
-    3 Power Saving on the Device Level
    -    3.1 Overview
    -    3.2 Challenges in Power Modeling
    -    3.3 Existing Power Models
    -    3.4 The Component Power Model
        -    3.4.1 Remarks
        -    3.4.2 The Components of a
        -    3.4.3 Power Consumption
    -    3.5 The Parameterized Power Model
    -    3.6 The Affine Power Model
    -    3.7 Summary
-    4 Power Saving on the Cell Level (Single-cell)
    -    4.1 Overview
    -    4.2 Power-saving in Literature
    -    4.3 and
    -    4.4
    -    4.5 ( )
        -    4.5.1 Problem Formulation
        -    4.5.2 Step 1: , and Resource Allocation
        -    4.5.3 Step 2: Subcarrier and Power Allocation
        -    4.5.4 Results
    -    4.6 Summary
-    5 Power Saving on the Network Level (Multi-cell)
    -    5.1 Overview
    -    5.2 Channel Allocation in Literature
    -    5.3 System Model and Problem Formulation
    -    5.4 Alignment Strategies
        -    5.4.1 Sequential Alignment
        -    5.4.2 Random Alignment
        -    5.4.3 P-persistent Ranking
        -    5.4.4 Distributed Alignment with Memory
    -    5.5 Results
    -    5.6 Summary
-    6 Conclusions, Limitations and Future Work
    -    6.1 Summary and Conclusions
    -    6.2 Limitations and Future Work
-    A Appendix
    -    A.1 Proof of Convexity for Problem ()
    -    A.2 Proof of Convexity for Problem ()
    -    A.3 Margin-adaptive Resource Allocation
-    B List of Publications
    -    B.1 Published
    -    B.2 Accepted
    -    B.3 Submitted
    -    B.4 Project Reports
    -    B.5 Contributions
-    C Attached Publications

###### List of Tables

-    3.1 Model parameters assumed for figures of Chapter 3
-    3.2 Reference power consumption values of transceiver blocks
-    3.3 Complexity of operations
-    3.4 Parameter breakdown
-    3.5 Summary of affine power model parameters
-    3.6 Comparison of required input parameters for different power
    models
-    4.1 Simulation parameters
-    4.2 Power model parameters used in Section 4.4
-    4.3 System parameters
-    5.1 Simulation parameters

###### List of Figures

-    1.1 Mobile traffic forecast 2012-2017
-    2.1 The carbon footprint for an average subscriber in 2007
-    2.2 European daily traffic pattern
-    2.3 Adoption of technology
-    2.4 Mobile subscriptions by technology, 2009-2018
-    2.5 An illustration of
-    2.6 An illustration of
-    2.7 Resource allocation in a combined / system
-    2.8 Example of multi-user diversity
-    2.9 Comparison of capacities
-    2.10 Geometric interpretation of a simple convex problem
-    2.11 A network in the network simulator
-    2.12 Sample simulation flowchart
-    3.1 The components of the modelled
-    3.2 The power-added efficiency over the maximum output power
-    3.3 @xmath as a function of bandwidth used
-    3.4 @xmath as a function of bandwidth used
-    3.5 @xmath as a function of bandwidth used
-    3.6 conversion loss function
-    3.7 @xmath as a function of bandwidth used
-    3.8 conversion loss function
-    3.9 @xmath as a function of bandwidth used
-    3.10 @xmath as a function of bandwidth used
-    3.11 @xmath as a function of bandwidth used
-    (a) power consumption per component, @xmath
-    (b) power consumption per component, @xmath
-    3.12 @xmath per component in percent
-    (a) One antenna
-    (b) Two antennas
-    3.13 Load-dependent power model for an
-    3.14 Comparison of the parameterized with the complex model
-    (a) One antenna
-    (b) Two antennas
-    4.1 Illustration of two possible power/time trade-offs
-    4.2 Comparison of the effect of load dependence
-    4.3 Illustration of for two links
-    4.4 Supply power consumption for a target spectral efficiency
-    4.5 Fundamental limits for power consumption in
-    (a) Supply power consumption under the affine model.
-    (b) Supply power consumption under the Frenger model.
-    (c) Supply power consumption under the linear model.
-    4.6 frame structure
-    4.7 Illustration of margin-adaptive power allocation over three
    steps
-    4.8 Outline of the algorithm.
-    4.9 Performance comparison in step 1
-    4.10 Outage probability in step 1 and the benchmark
-    4.11 Average number of time slots over increasing target link rates
-    4.12 Supply power consumption for different schemes overall
-    4.13 Supply power consumption for different schemes in step 2
-    4.14 Energy efficiency as a function of sum rate
-    5.1 Illustration of alignment in a network
-    5.2 Illustration of sequential alignment
-    5.3 power consumption over different cell sum rates
-    5.4 power consumption over frames at 1 Mbps per mobile
-    5.5 power consumption over frames at 2 Mbps per mobile
-    5.6 Retransmission probability over targeted rate.

## List of Acronyms

3GPP
    3rd Generation Partnership Project

AA
    Antenna Adaptation

AC
    Alternating Current

ACLR
    Adjacent Carrier Leakage Ratio

ADC
    Analog-to-Digital Converter

ASIC
    Application-Specific Integrated Circuit

ASIP
    Application-Specific Instruction-set Processor

BA
    Bandwidth Adaptation

BB
    Baseband

BS
    Base Station

CDM
    Code Division Multiplexing

CDMA
    Code Division Multiple Access

CMOS
    Complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor

CSI
    Channel State Information

DAC
    Digital-to-Analog Converter

DC
    Direct Current

DTX
    Discontinuous Transmission

EARTH
    Energy Aware Radio and neTwork tecHnologies

FDD
    Frequency Division Duplex

FDM
    Frequency Division Multiplexing

FDMA
    Frequency Division Multiple Access

FFT
    Fast Fourier Transform

FPGA
    Field-Programmable Gate Array

GOPS
    Giga Operations Per Second

GSM
    Global System for Mobile communications

HetNet
    Heterogeneous Network

ICT
    Information and Communication Technologies

IQ
    In-phase/Quadrature

LNA
    Low-Noise Amplifier

LTE
    Long Term Evolution

M2M
    Machine-to-Machine

MCS
    Modulation and Coding Scheme

MIMO
    Multiple-Input Multiple-Output

OFDM
    Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing

OFDMA
    Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access

OPEX
    Operating Expenses

PA
    Power Amplifier

PAPR
    Peak-to-Average Power Ratio

PC
    Power Control

PRAIS
    Power and Resource Allocation Including Sleep

QoE
    Quality of Experience

QoS
    Quality of Service

RAPS
    Resource allocation using Antenna adaptation, Power control and
    Sleep modes

RF
    Radio Frequency

RCG
    Rate Craving Greedy

RRH
    Remote Radio Head

RRM
    Radio Resource Management

SC-FDMA
    Single-carrier FDMA

SIMO
    Single-Input Multiple-Output

SINR
    Signal-to-Interference-and-Noise-Ratio

SISO
    Single-Input Single-Output

SNR
    Signal-to-Noise-Ratio

SotA
    State-Of-The-Art

TDD
    Time Division Duplex

TDM
    Time Division Multiplexing

TDMA
    Time Division Multiple Access

UE
    User Equipment

UMTS
    Universal Mobile Telecommunications System

VCO
    Voltage-Controlled Oscillator

WSN
    Wireless Sensor Network

\printnomenclature

[0.6in]

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Overview

In the first section of this chapter, it is argued why energy efficiency
in wireless networks is an important research topic and what goals this
thesis sets out to achieve. The second section introduces the
contributions of this thesis towards achieving these goals. The third
section outlines the thesis structure. In the last section, the Energy
Aware Radio and neTwork tecHnologies ( EARTH ) project is briefly
introduced which provided laboratory results for the contents of Chapter
3 .

### 1.2 Thesis Context

Since the emergence of mobile communications, both the number and the
density of mobile devices have constantly increased [ Bi et al. , 2001 ]
. They are predicted to rise further, fueled by innovations such as
Machine-to-Machine ( M2M ) communication and the ‘Internet of Things’ [
Wu et al. , 2011 , Brazell et al. , 2005 ] . It is predicted that a
trillion devices will be connected to the Internet by the end of 2013 [
Wireless Week, 2010 ] , with a growing share of these on mobile
networks. Fig. 1.1 shows a forecast of the resulting mobile traffic
until 2017. To serve this growing traffic load, the capacity, size and
density of the infrastructure network are continually upgraded by
network operators.

While for the past 20 years network capacity, reliability and deployment
were the main concerns during these upgrades, new factors like rising
energy prices, increasing consumer attention to the emission of @xmath ,
the deployment of BSs in remote off-grid locations, and disaster
recovery have come into play. To respond to these new factors, the
energy efficiency of the current and future mobile networks needs to be
enhanced. Delivery of bits through the cellular network has to become
cheaper. @xmath emissions have to be reduced. BSs in remote locations
must become self-sustaining. And maintaining connectivity after
disasters is critical as the dependence of people and services on mobile
communication in a disaster aftermath grows.

Lowering the power consumption of the BSs in cellular networks addresses
all of these problems. It reduces the network operational cost and the
required @xmath emission. Installing grid-independent BSs becomes more
feasible when less power is needed for their operation. Furthermore,
connectivity can be provided for a longer period of time in case of
disastrous power interruptions.

However, the causes of power consumption in BSs have not been studied in
depth. Whether and by how much this power consumption can be lowered
through operational modifications is an open problem. The answer to this
problem affects the design of future transmission schemes and hardware.
Once the most effective mechanisms for reducing power consumption are
understood, they can be used to operate BSs with lower power consumption
and, thus, with higher efficiency. Radio resource schedulers need to be
developed which enhance the efficiency of operation in both individual
BSs and a network of BSs .

As such, this thesis sets out to achieve the following goals:

-   Identify how the power consumption of a BS is comprised in terms of
    hardware components. Evaluate what operating parameters have the
    strongest effect on the BS power consumption. Model this consumption
    in equations such that it can be reused and modified.

-   Identify promising operational techniques to reduce a BS ’s power
    consumption without affecting the Quality of Service ( QoS ).
    Generate resource schedulers which employ such techniques.

-   Understand how power consumption can be reduced in a network of
    multiple BSs . Provide solutions to address power consumption on the
    network level.

### 1.3 Thesis Contributions

This thesis contributes towards the enhancement of energy efficiency in
wireless networks by reducing the power consumption of radio BS through
RRM without affecting the QoS . In particular, it provides the following
contributions:

-   First, the power consumption of State-Of-The-Art ( SotA ) LTE BSs is
    studied and presented in detail. The number of antennas, the
    transmission power and the lowered consumption through DTX are
    derived as the most relevant operating parameters. A general,
    practical power model for cellular BSs is constructed.

-   Second, the attainable power savings of power control, DTX and
    Antenna Adaptation ( AA ) are quantified. The three techniques are
    jointly applied to a new energy efficient and spectrum efficient
    OFDMA scheduler.

-   Third, the alignment of DTX time slots between neighbouring BSs is
    identified as a multi-cell power-saving mechanism. Three alternative
    alignment schemes are studied with regard to their power
    consumption. The findings lead to a novel time slot alignment scheme
    which is shown to overcome the limitations of the other techniques.

### 1.4 Thesis Structure

Chapter 2 first addresses the issue why this work is concerned with the
supply power consumption of cellular BSs in particular. Next, it
provides an overview of Green Radio research alongside a review of
relevant literature. Finally, a technical background for Chapters 3 , 4
, and 5 is provided about the topics LTE , multi-carrier technology,
multi-antenna transmission, convex optimization, and computer simulation
techniques.

Chapter 3 begins with an analysis of the power consumption of a SotA BS
in order to identify opportunities for power saving. Each subcomponent
is individually inspected and described with regard to its power
consumption. A comprehensive BS power model is established as the sum of
each subcomponent’s power consumption. Relevant and promising saving
mechanisms are identified. A parameterized power model is proposed which
encompasses these saving mechanisms and abstracts architectural details
in favor of simplicity. Finally, an affine power model is derived, which
is used through the remainder of this thesis. The affine mapping this
model provides between transmission power and supply power is
advantageous for its application in optimization.

Chapter 4 applies the knowledge on BS power consumption from Chapter 3
by proposing power-saving RRM mechanisms. On the basis of the affine
power model, PC and DTX are studied. The potential of their joint
optimization is identified. The power savings achieved by this method
over the SotA are quantified in simulation. The joint optimization of PC
, DTX and AA is applied in a comprehensive scheduler for power-saving in
OFDMA downlink transmission within a cell.

Chapter 5 adds the consideration of intercell interference. When
multiple BSs are considered, the use of sleep modes in each BS results
in significant fluctuations of interference. Constructive alignment of
interference is proposed to exploit this effect and can be employed for
a decrease of power consumption. To address multi-cell power saving
resource allocation, distributed DTX with memory is proposed and
compared to alternative alignment mechanisms. Network simulations are
used to estimate achievable savings.

Finally, conclusions of the above research, a discussion of limitations
and an outlook for future research is provided in Chapter 6 .

Regarding the format of this document: There are two non-overlapping
bibliographies at the end of this document. One contains publications by
the author of this thesis. References to these publications are made
with alphabetic indices, such as ‘[a]’ or ‘[b]’. References to other
literature are written with numeric indices such as ‘[1]’ or ‘[22]’.

### 1.5 The Earth Project

The research presented in Chapters 3 and 4 of this thesis has received
funding and experimental data from the Energy Aware Radio and neTwork
tecHnologies ( EARTH ) project. Initiated by the European Union’s
Framework Programme ( FP ) 7, the EARTH project aligned cooperation
between 15 industry and academic institutions towards the common goal of
driving up energy efficiency in current and future cellular networks.
The project lasted from January 2010 to June 2012. It was founded to
work on

-   deployment strategies,

-   network architectures,

-   network management,

-   adaptation to load variations with time,

-   innovative component designs with energy efficient adaptive
    operating points,

-   and new radio and network resource management protocols for
    multi-cell cooperative networking.

The most prominent outcomes of the project were

-   the cellular network life cycle analysis [ Fehske et al. , 2010 ] ,

-   the energy efficiency evaluation framework [ Auer et al. , 2011a ,
    EARTH Project Work Package 2, 2010 ] ,

-   the BS power model [ Desset et al. , 2012 ] ,

-   hardware implementations of PAs with improved dynamics [ Gonzalez
    et al. , 2011 ] and a sleep mode enabled small cell [ EARTH Project
    Work Package 4, 2012 ] ,

-   and numerous individual techniques which reduce the power
    consumption of cellular networks such as the ones presented in
    Chapter 4 [ EARTH Project Work Package 3, 2012 ] .

All project deliverables are available on the project website for
reference [ 01b, a ] .

## Chapter 2 Motivation and Background

### 2.1 Overview

This chapter first outlines the motivation why reducing the power
consumption of cellular BSs constitutes a large steps towards energy
efficient wireless networks and how this reduction can be achieved.
Second, it discusses the difficulties of quantifying energy efficiency
and provides an overview of Green Radio research topics in literature.
Finally, technical concepts which are applied in Chapters 4 and 5 are
briefly introduced for the unfamiliar reader.

The work in Section 2.2 has been previously published by the author of
this thesis in [ Auer et al. , 2010 ] . The technical background in
Section 2.5 is sourced from literature as referenced.

### 2.2 Energy Efficient Base Stations

Life cycle analyses of mobile networks and their equipment have shown
that the access infrastructure ( BSs , data centers, controllers)
generates significantly more @xmath than the connected mobile devices [
Fehske et al. , 2010 ] . They also reveal that mobile devices cause the
majority of @xmath emissions during manufacturing due to their
battery-optimized operation and short life times. In contrast, BSs tend
to be less power optimized with longer life times leading to the
majority of @xmath emitted during operation. This is illustrated in Fig.
2.1 by the detailed carbon footprint of the average mobile network
subscriber in 2007, the most recent data available. It shows that only
20% of the @xmath emissions over the life of a mobile device were caused
during operation. On the contrary, 82% of BS emissions are owed to
operation, either as diesel or electricity consumption.

While the power consumption of mobile devices has always been a topic of
research and development due to the constraints imposed by battery
operation, BSs were usually installed in urban locations with good
connections to the power grid providing little incentive for efforts in
energy efficiency. However, as briefly mentioned in Chapter 1 , the
energy efficiency of cellular BSs is receiving more attention due to
several factors [ Louhi & Scheck, 2008 ] :

-   Rising energy prices [ Aleklett et al. , 2010 ] combined with
    decreasing profit margins [ Fettweis & Zimmermann, 2008 ] require
    operators to optimize their operational expenses by decreasing power
    bills.

-   In countries with incomplete or unreliable power grids, BSs are
    operated with grid-independent power sources like diesel generators
    or renewable energy sources [ Fettweis & Zimmermann, 2008 ] . The
    costly deliveries of diesel and size of renewable energy sources
    like wind engines or solar panels make low consumption of the BS
    desirable [ Nema et al. , 2010 ] .

-   In the face of global warming, customers have developed an
    understanding and sensibility for power consumption. Companies aim
    to apply green labels to their products [ Han et al. , 2011a ,
    Sugiyama, 2012 ] .

-   Disasters like the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami have shown
    that the installed battery backups were insufficient for long power
    grid interruptions [ NTT DOCOMO Technical Journal Editorial Office,
    2012 ] . After the disaster, BSs (and, thus, most communication)
    were unavailable for days until repair units had reconnected them to
    the power grid. Efforts in disaster recovery include low-power
    emergency modes and a generally lower power consumption to enable
    BSs to operate longer on battery power [ Ran, 2011 ] .

For these reasons, reducing the operating power consumption of LTE BSs
is the goal of the work presented in this thesis. Recent analyses
provided information on how this goal could be achieved. In particular,
it was found that while the cell traffic load fluctuates significantly,
BSs are mostly unable to adapt to these fluctuations.

BSs have been designed and deployed to provide peak capacities to
minimize outages. However, in practical scenarios, traffic is rarely at
its peak. While BSs may be designed for crowded midday downtown
situations, there are strong variations over time and location with
regard to the density of mobile traffic. For example, see the typical
mobile traffic in Europe over the course of a day in Fig. 2.2 . It
varies over a range of more than 80% and has an average of only 60% load
[ Auer et al. , 2011b ] . Yet, although load varies so strongly, the
power consumption of cellular BSs was found to vary as little as 2% over
the course of a day [ Arnold et al. , 2010 ] . BS power consumption is
thus not yet sufficiently adaptive to the traffic demand. Hence, the
times of day when the traffic load is below peak provide room for
exploitation. During such times, the capacity of a BS can be reduced to
achieve lower power consumption without affecting the user satisfaction
or QoS . How this could be achieved is the contribution of this thesis.

Note here an important differentiation between Green Radio technology
proposals being either in design or in operation. Design proposals are
made to affect the architecture or hardware of a BS , such as changing
the type of PA . Design changes may take a long time to reach the market
due to specification, approval or manufacturing. In contrast, operation
proposals, like turning a BS off when it is unused, can reach the market
much faster. They may be applicable to existing hardware and can be
applied via software upgrades.

Although design and operation changes can be made independently, they
affect each other. For example, a change in design—like the introduction
of a secondary low power wake-up controller—may enable new types of
operation like a cognitive wake-up functionality. In turn, the popular
application of a certain type of operation, like sleep modes, may have
consequences for future design decisions by providing incentive for
producing sleep-mode-enabled hardware. In this thesis, this intertwining
of design and operation is taken into account by first identifying the
structure and potential of the hardware and then exploiting this
potential in operational improvements to the BS .

### 2.3 Quantifying Energy Efficiency

Enhancing the energy efficiency of communication networks has led to a
field of research popularly labelled Green Radio , which this thesis is
part of. This field encompasses all efforts taken to increase the ratio
of network quality over energy spent or @xmath emitted. Making ‘radios
greener’ can be achieved by either increasing network quality at
unchanged energy expenditure, by providing equal quality at a lower
cost, or both. Here, typical network quality indicators to be improved
are capacity, fairness, latency, reliability, and range. Cost is often
measured in @xmath emission, energy consumption, or power consumption.
Note that energy consumption is equal to the product of the average
power consumption and a certain duration. In other words, power is
energy normalized over time.

When discussing Green Radio research and results, it is important to be
aware of some intricacies and necessary differentiations. Energy
efficiency is not easily compared when considering different network
quality indicators. For example, at equal energy consumption, an
increase in capacity may come at the cost of increased latency, which
cannot be easily weighted against each other. Alternatively, a decrease
in power consumption through reduced network quality may trigger users
to change their behavior which negates the initial savings. These
problems are present in many fields of research and have lead to
discussions about QoS , which tries to assess the alternative a user may
be more satisfied with [ Andrews et al. , 2001 ] . But since an industry
standard for the QoS does not yet exist, the common ground is to measure
capacity as the most basic metric while stating the considered scenario
assumptions such as geographic location, transmission duration, latency,
etc. [ EARTH Project Work Package 2, 2010 ] .

Just as there are several ways to measure network quality, there are
several alternatives to measuring the cost incurred. The simplest is to
only consider transmission power at the antenna of a wireless
transmitter. This number is usually well-known as it is regulated and
targeted in hardware design. A more comprehensive approach is to
consider total power spent by a transmitter which includes the heat
generated while producing or processing a wireless signal. This number
can usually be measured at the mains supply or deduced from battery
durations. It is called the supply power . But even the supply power
required by a device during operation may not display the full picture.
Aside from operation, a wireless device requires production before and
disposal after. These steps can consume significant energy, particularly
in electronic devices. They are composed of resource acquisition and
mining, transportation, design, facility construction, production, and
recycling. When widening the inspection of power or energy consumption
to this global level, the consideration of watts or joules is
insufficient. Rather, the global cost of the steps is measured in terms
of @xmath emission. Comparing @xmath emissions instead of power
consumptions allows taking into account that the @xmath emitted by
generating a watt of power varies depending on many factors. For
instance, a BS operated in a remote location on imported diesel may
cause much higher @xmath emissions than a solar-powered BS on an urban
rooftop. As energy generation usually does not lead to the emission of
pure @xmath , but rather a mixture of global warming affecting gases,
the effects of these actions are typically normalized to @xmath
-equivalent (or @xmath -eq). For example, the Information and
Communication Technologies ( ICT ) industry is estimated to have caused
about 1.5% of global @xmath -eq emissions in 2007 [ Malmodin et al. ,
2010 ] . From 2007 to 2020, the @xmath -eq emission caused by mobile
networks is predicted to grow from 0.2% to 0.4% [ Fehske et al. , 2010 ]
. Thus, a doubling of the energy efficiency of mobile communications
would allow keeping @xmath -eq emissions on the 2007 level which is a
common research and development target [ Blume et al. , 2010 ] .

As described above, both measuring network quality as well as measuring
cost are very intricate. Therefore, the metric of watts of supply power
per bit alongside clear network definitions has been chosen as the
reference for this thesis. When applying techniques described here to
larger scenarios, the additional definitions provide the information
necessary for converting watts to @xmath -eq over a regional expanse and
duration of operation.

### 2.4 Green Radio in Literature

Historically, the early works on energy efficiency for wireless networks
have been triggered by a desire to extend battery lives in cellular, ad
hoc or sensor networks, for example see [ Ye et al. , 2002 , Cui et al.
, 2004 , Cui et al. , 2005 , Bhatia & Kodialam, 2004 ] . By the early
2000s, growing environmental concerns had lead to extensive life cycle
analyses of cellular networks [ Malmodin et al. , 2001 , Weidman &
Lundberg, 2000 ] . These analyses collected all steps in a devices’
life, quantified them with regard to energy expenditure and @xmath
emissions and joined them with the number of units sold and installed.
The resulting statistics revealed that the power consumption of mobile
network infrastructure was significant and that the @xmath emissions of
the ICT industry were as high as those of international air traffic [
Fehske et al. , 2010 , Fettweis & Zimmermann, 2008 ] . Through these
findings, interest grew with regard to the energy efficiency of
transmitters which are powered by the mains grid.

As a consequence, in 2008, the collaborative Green Radio project was
initiated in the UK which coined the term [ Mobile VCE, a ] . The
efforts were extended in 2009 by the European EARTH project [ Gruber
et al. , 2009 ] . Both projects encouraged specifically the enhancement
of the energy efficiency of cellular access networks by improving their
architecture and operation. The works proposed since then can be
distinguished by the network aspects they consider.

For one, there are works which address the hardware of the radio access
network. A general overview of such hardware improvements is provided in
[ Ferling et al. , 2010 ] . Specifically, the improvement of transceiver
units is considered in [ Gonzalez et al. , 2011 , Bories et al. , 2011 ]
. New PA architectures are proposed in [ Hammi et al. , 2010 ] . The
EARTH project has summarized proposed hardware improvements to LTE BSs
in [ EARTH Project Work Package 4, 2012 ] .

Another group of works is the field of Heterogeneous Networks . These
works are concerned with the power consumption of future networks which
are predicted to consist of a very large number of low power small BSs ,
such as micro, pico, or femto, in addition to macro BSs . The study in [
Klessig et al. , 2011 ] finds the optimal density of small cells to
match a traffic requirement from an energy perspective. In [ Richter
et al. , 2009 ] , the area power consumption metric is proposed to
enable comparison between different HetNets . Badic et al. [ Badic
et al. , 2009 ] formalize the trade-off that is present between capacity
and power consumption in HetNets . In [ Khirallah & Thompson, 2012 ] ,
it is suggested that the overlap between macro and small cells in
HetNets should be used in combination with sleep modes when the capacity
increase provided by small cells is not needed. The authors in [ Hoydis
et al. , 2011 ] argue that due to the complexity of HetNets , they
should be self-organizing and self-adapting to the traffic situation.

As a third topic, several kinds of sleep modes are proposed. Long sleep
modes with duration of minutes or hours are very effective in reducing
power consumption, but require a wake-up mechanism and reduce coverage.
Short sleep modes in the order of microseconds to seconds, which are
also called dozing, micro sleep or DTX , do not pose these problems but
promise smaller reductions of the power consumption. As a consequence,
long sleep modes are proposed for situations in which coverage can be
maintained through other means. For example, when network densities are
sufficient such that neighbouring BSs can take over the coverage of
sleeping BSs [ Oh & Krishnamachari, 2010 , Ashraf et al. , 2011 ] .
Short sleep modes can be applied independent of coverage. The authors in
[ Frenger et al. , 2011 ] propose to use DTX when a cell is completely
empty, posing a simple but very inflexible mechanism. In [ Saker et al.
, 2010 ] it is assumed that a BS consists of multiple independent
transmitters, some of which can be deactivated according to traffic
requirements, thus increasing the adaptivity to load. With regard to an
entire network of sleep capable cells, Abdallah et al. [ Abdallah et al.
, 2012 ] study the alignment of sleep modes between neighbouring cells
and conclude that sleep modes should be synchronized and orthogonal for
maximum efficiency.

Related to sleep modes is the field of cell breathing, cell shrinking or
cell zooming through the adjustment of the transmission power [ Han &
Ansari, 2012 , Abgrall et al. , 2010 , Niu et al. , 2010 ] . By
introducing flexibility with regard to the transmission power of a BS ,
a network can flexibly adjust to coverage requirements by increasing or
decreasing cell sizes. For example, an increase of a cell’s size may be
needed when neighbouring cells enter sleep mode.

An extension of sleep modes is the topic of adapting multi-antenna
transmission. Rather than using all installed antennas, a BS could
deliberately reduce its Multiple-Input Multiple-Output ( MIMO ) degree
to deactivate some antennas when high capacities are not required [
Hedayati et al. , 2012 , Skillermark & Frenger, 2012 , Kim et al. , 2009
, Xu et al. , 2011 ] . These approaches are labeled MIMO adaptation,
antenna adaptation or MIMO muting. An alternative approach to exploit
multiple antennas for energy efficiency is proposed by Wu et al. [ Wu
et al. , 2012b ] and Stavridis et al. [ Stavridis et al. , 2012 ] , who,
through—spatial modulation—use all antennas, but never at the same time.

Resource scheduling is a diverse group of works in which different
approaches are proposed. Relaxing the delay requirement can be exploited
for opportunistic power saving [ Gupta & Strinati, 2011 , Chong &
Jorswieck, 2012 ] . Spreading signals over a larger bandwidth allows
reducing the transmission power [ Ambrosy et al. , 2012 , Videv & Haas,
2011 ] . Approaches such as game theory promise gains by providing
trading mechanisms for a self-organized allocation of resources for
enhanced energy efficiency [ Meshkati et al. , 2007 ] .

In order to exploit the typically deployed overlapping radio access
network generations, it is proposed in [ EARTH Project Work Package 3,
2012 ] to combine a deactivation of one network technology, e.g. Global
System for Mobile communications ( GSM ), with the fall-back to another
such as LTE . However, this generates issues with backward compatibility
and QoS .

To exploit spare backhaul capacity, it is suggested in [ Scalia et al. ,
2011 ] to use coordinated multi-point transmission between multiple BSs
while deactivating parts of each BS . However, the benefits strongly
depend on the additional power consumption caused by the backhaul link.
When combined with sleep modes, it was found in [ Han et al. , 2011b ]
that this approach only reduces power consumption in the presence of
high data rate users.

In [ Hevizi & Gódor, 2011 ] it is proposed to switch sectorized macro
BSs to omni-directional operation when the capacity requirements are
low. While this promises to save two thirds of the power consumption in
typical three-sector setups, it also requires the installation of
additional omni-directional antennas at BS sites.

The most far-reaching proposals for energy efficient cellular networks
break with the cellular assumptions presumed in GSM , Universal Mobile
Telecommunications System ( UMTS ) or LTE . By separating data and
control planes from one another, future networks could have large,
long-range ‘umbrella’ control transmitters which take care of discovery
and coverage. These would overarch small data plane BSs which are only
activated when they are needed. Such a network setup would provide a
very high capacity at a very high degree of load flexibility. These
proposals are referred to in literature as ‘ghost’ or ‘phantom’ cell
concepts [ Strinati et al. , 2011 , Ternon et al. , 2013 ] , since the
small data plane BS are ‘invisible’ to the User Equipment ( UE ).

For good surveys on Green Radio topics, the reader is referred to [ Han
et al. , 2011a , Auer et al. , 2011b , Wang et al. , 2012 , Ephremides,
2002 , Capozzi et al. , 2012 ] .

Note that detailed literature backgrounds are again provided for each
individual chapter in Chapters 3 , 4 and 5 .

In this wide field of research, this thesis can be placed in the group
of works dealing with resource scheduling.

### 2.5 Technical Background

The following sections outline some fundamental concepts which reappear
in Chapters 3 , 4 , and 5 of this thesis, namely, LTE , multi-carrier
technology, multiple antenna transmission, convex optimization, and the
usage of simulations to model complex cellular systems.

#### 2.5.1 Lte

LTE [ Dahlman et al. , 2011 ] is a wireless access standard superseding
the GSM and UMTS for increased network capacities. It is predicted to be
adopted in 93 countries by the end of 2013 [ GSA Secretariat, 2013 ] .
See Fig. 2.3 for an illustration on the world map. To this extent, the
number of LTE subscriptions is rising steadily as it replaces older
network technologies, as shown in Fig. 2.4 . LTE is being continually
standardized and developed by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (
3GPP ). It is designed to achieve the following set of goals [ Sesia
et al. , 2009 ] :

-   faster connection establishment and shorter latency;

-   higher user spectral efficiencies of more than 5 bps/Hz on the
    downlink using link bandwidths of up to 20 MHz;

-   uniformity of service provision independent of mobile position in a
    cell;

-   improved cost per bit;

-   flexibility in spectrum usage to accommodate to national band
    allocations;

-   simplified network architecture;

-   seamless switching between different radio access technologies;

-   reasonable power consumption for the mobile terminal.

As LTE is a wireless technology on a shared medium, it is required to
handle resource sharing and interference. These two important challenges
are addressed in Chapters 4 and 5 , respectively. Note that while LTE
also consists of non-radio aspects such as the System Architecture
Evolution ( SAE ), this thesis is only concerned with its BS and radio
access aspects.

#### 2.5.2 Multi-carrier Technology

The wireless medium is inherently shared. Wireless transmissions occur
simultaneously in resources such as the frequency spectrum, time, and
location. Therefore, transmissions can negatively affect one another
through interference. The technique of dividing a resource into chunks
to avoid overlap between multiple transmissions is called multiplexing .
Time is typically shared via Time Division Multiplexing ( TDM ),
frequency via Frequency Division Multiplexing ( FDM ), and location via
installing BSs a significant distance apart from one another.
Multiplexing allows providing multiple independent links carrying
independent information streams on the wireless medium. These streams
can be allocated to different users or scheduled to the same user for
increased sum data rates, thus increasing the scheduling flexibility. In
TDM , the shared resource is the time domain in which only one link can
be active at any point in time and all links are spread over the entire
available bandwidth. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 2.5 for four
users. In FDM , the shared resource is the frequency domain. Here, links
only take up a portion of the available frequency spectrum. See Fig. 2.6
for an illustration of FDM with multiple carriers and four users. Both
of these technologies have been applied commercially in wireless
technologies for decades. For example, TDM is the access scheme of
choice in the GSM standard [ Glover & Grant, 1998 ] , whereas FDM has
been employed in cordless phones [ Garg, 2010 ] . A third popular
multiple access scheme, Code Division Multiplexing ( CDM )— e.g. used in
the UMTS [ Pike, 1998 ] —is not discussed here as it is not related to
this thesis.

Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing ( OFDM ) extends FDM to
provide a very flexible high capacity multiple access scheme. Similar in
notion to FDM , OFDM subdivides the bandwidth available for signal
transmission into a multitude of narrowband subcarriers. The channels
affecting these subcarriers are sufficiently narrow in the frequency
domain to be considered flat-fading [ Dahlman et al. , 2011 ] which is
important for link adaptation. Unlike in FDM where frequency bands are
non-overlapping, OFDM subcarriers are packed tightly and do overlap.
Yet, through selection of the right pulse shape, the signals on each
subcarrier remain orthogonal and can be transmitted in parallel with
little to no mutual interference.

In addition to this fine separation in frequency, in OFDM , the
transmission duration is divided into short slots to create an OFDM
block with flat-fading characteristics in which one modulation symbol is
transmitted (Multiple antenna technology allows the transmission of
multiple symbols, as described in the following section). The modulation
symbols can be from any modulation alphabet such as Quadrature Phase
Shift Keying ( QPSK ), 16- Quadrature Amplitude Modulation ( QAM ), or
64- QAM . In LTE , such an OFDM block is labeled a resource element .
The available bandwidth and a duration called frame are divided into a
number of resource elements. Multiple resource elements are combined to
constitute resource blocks . When OFDM is used to grant multiple users
access to the shared transmission medium, it is called Orthogonal
Frequency Division Multiple Access ( OFDMA ). An illustration of a
resulting OFDMA frame consisting of a set of resource blocks scheduled
to different users is shown in Fig. 2.7 . For a typical LTE system with
a subcarrier spacing @xmath kHz, a system bandwidth @xmath MHz,
12 subcarriers per resource block and a 10% guard band, the number of
available resource blocks over the frequency domain is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Total system bandwidth in Hz \nomenclature @xmath Subcarrier
spacing in Hz \nomenclature @xmath Number of subcarriers \nomenclature
@xmath Number of time slots

Although a resource block consists of multiple subcarriers constituting
resource elements, it is the smallest unit which can be individually
scheduled, according to the LTE standard [ 3GPP, 2010b ] . For this
thesis, it is thus assumed that a resource block consists of one
subcarrier and stretches over the duration of one time slot. A frame is
comprised of @xmath time slots. For example, with @xmath and @xmath ,
there are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

resource blocks available for scheduling in an OFDMA frame.

The option to schedule each resource block to any user in the system
enables exploitation of an effect called multi-user diversity . As the
channels on each resource block between each user and the BS is
different, resource blocks can be scheduled such that only good channels
are used. Statistically, over a certain bandwidth, number of time slots,
and number of users, it is very probable that a good channel exists.
This high probability results in an increase of the transmission data
rate compared to a system which does not exploit this effect. An example
of scheduling frequency by multiuser diversity is illustrated in Fig.
2.8 . Opportunistic scheduling between multiple users in a system is an
important technique employed in Chapter 4 .

#### 2.5.3 Multiple Antenna Technology

The transmission and reception of wireless signals with multiple
antennas is a standard technique in modern communication systems [ Kühn,
2006 ] . Exploiting multi-path scattering, MIMO techniques deliver
significant performance enhancements in terms of data transmission rate
and interference reduction. The term multi-path refers to the arrival of
transmitted signals at an intended receiver through differing angles,
time delays and/or frequency shifts due to the scattering of
electromagnetic waves in the environment, i.e. over multiple paths.
Consequently, the received signal power fluctuates through the random
superposition of the arriving multi-path signals. This random
fluctuation allows the recognition and separation of the paths signals
take between the multiple transmit antennas and multiple receive
antennas, allowing to benefit from two important effects. First, like
with multi-user diversity described in the previous section, having
multiple signal paths reduces the probability of a deep fade. Hence, the
reliability of the transmission is increased. The benefit of this effect
is called the spatial diversity gain. Second, under suitable conditions
such as rich scattering in the environment, separate data streams can be
transmitted on the multiple paths. Thus, at the same time, on the same
frequency spectrum, and in the same place, multiple data streams can be
transmitted, increasing the data rate compared to a system with fewer
antennas [ Biglieri et al. , 2007 ] . The benefit of this effect is
called the spatial multiplexing gain.

Under the assumption of statistical Channel State Information ( CSI ) at
the transmitter, full CSI at the receiver and equal power allocated to
each antenna, the ergodic MIMO link capacity is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3a)
              @xmath      (2.3b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with the expected value operator @xmath , transmit power @xmath ,
channel state matrix @xmath , the number of transmit and receive
antennas @xmath and @xmath , respectively, identity matrix of size
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath as the @xmath -th singular value of @xmath
[ Goldsmith et al. , 2003 ] . The gains in capacity through the use of
multiple antennas can be charted by generating a number of Rayleigh
distributed channel coefficients @xmath and plotting the achieved
capacities. Figure 2.9 shows an illustration of achievable capacities,
revealing two important characteristics of the MIMO capacity. First, it
can be seen that capacity grows linearly with Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (
SNR ) at high SNRs . Second, the capacity grows linearly with @xmath .
Thus, more antennas yield a higher capacity. In this thesis, up to four
receive and transmit antennas are considered due to limitations detailed
in Section 4.5.2 . \nomenclature @xmath Ergodic capacity in bps/Hz
\nomenclature @xmath Expected value operator \nomenclature @xmath Number
of receiver antennas \nomenclature @xmath Channel state matrix
\nomenclature @xmath @xmath -th eigenvalue \nomenclature @xmath
Transmission power of a BS at the input of the antenna interface in W

While raising the number of antennas increases the capacity, it also
increases the complexity of transmitters and receivers. As will be shown
in Chapter 3 , this increase in complexity is accompanied by a larger
power consumption. It is studied in Chapter 4 how to trade off power
consumption with capacity for energy efficiency by changing the MIMO
mode through AA .

#### 2.5.4 Convex Optimization

An important topic employed in Chapter 4 is convex optimization which is
briefly introduced here.

A general optimization problem is often written as

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
                 @xmath                              (2.4)
                          @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The problem consists of the optimization variable @xmath , the objective
function @xmath , the inequality constraint functions @xmath , @xmath
and equality constraint functions @xmath , and the constraints @xmath .
@xmath is the solution of the problem ( 2.4 ) if for any @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , it holds that @xmath [ Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004 ] .

This form of optimization problems is convex, if the functions @xmath
satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , all @xmath with @xmath , and @xmath . In other words,
it is convex if the objective function as well as all constraints are
convex. Furthermore, any equality constraints @xmath have to be affine
as any

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (2.7a)
     @xmath      (2.7b)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath were convex, @xmath would be concave. The only way for both (
2.7a ) and ( 2.7b ) to be convex is when @xmath is affine.

The important property of convex optimization problems is that they can
be solved by interior point methods and that the local optimum is always
also the global solution [ Palomar & Eldar, 2010 ] . Furthermore, convex
optimization problems can often be solved very efficiently enabling
their application even in real-time systems such as resource schedulers.
A one-dimensional convex optimization problem without constraints can be
graphically illustrated. An example is shown in Fig. 2.10 for some
@xmath .

A simple example of a two-dimensional convex optimization problem is

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
                 @xmath   @xmath            (2.8)
                          @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The second gradient of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The objective function and its inequality constraints are convex as
@xmath is greater or equal to zero on all entries. The equality
constraint is affine. The sample problem is thus a convex optimization
problem. By inspection of ( 2.8 ), it can be found that the solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Either proving convexity of a problem or transforming a problem into a
convex problem are ways to efficiently solve optimization problems.

#### 2.5.5 Network Simulation

For many problems in communications research, analytical solutions have
not yet been found. To still be able to evaluate such problems,
researchers resort to repeated independent trial executions of a given
problem. The statistical outcomes of these trials provide insight into
the problems and potential solutions. These trials are often performed
as computer simulations—rather than in hardware—to avoid costly and time
consuming prototyping. Such computer simulations allow to model specific
problems, vary their nature and generally experiment on them. They can
also be used to test solutions and assess whether inventions deliver the
anticipated results. As they prove to be such a versatile tool, they are
used also in this thesis to assess the proposed solutions, when
analytical solutions cannot be found.

More specifically, cellular networks are simulated which are as large as
the computational constraints allow. For example, see Fig. 2.11 for the
layout of a typical network simulation consisting of UEs and BSs
distributed over an area.

The network simulator which produced the results shown in this thesis
was developed from the ground up by the author and contains the
following elements:

-   A configuration interface via configuration files,

-   Network generation consisting of:

    -   Geometric modules for the distribution of physical entities onto
        hexagonally arranged three-cell BS sites,

    -   Path loss and shadowing modules for the association of UEs to
        BSs as defined by the 3GPP [ 3GPP, 2010a ] ,

    -    OFDM MIMO Signal-to-Interference-and-Noise-Ratio ( SINR )
        calculation,

-   A frequency-selective fading model calibrated according to the
    Wireless world INitiative NEw Radio ( WINNER ) air interface
    configuration [ IST-4-027756 WINNER II, 2006 ] ,

-   Margin-adaptive resource allocation,

-   Several modules for the algorithms described in Chapters 4 and 5 ,

-   Interior point convex optimization via the Interior Point OPTimizer
    ( IPOPT ) [ Wächter & Laird, a ] ,

-   Data collection, analysis and plotting tools,

-   A unit test suite,

-   Detailed event logging,

-   Parallelization via the high-throughput parallelization system
    HTCondor [ Condor Team, 2013 ] .

In addition to the list of simulator elements, it is also important to
note what is not modelled. For example, capacity is calculated based on
SINR by the Shannon limit. Bit errors, retransmission, error correction
or protocols are not included; neither are pilots, channel sounding or
LTE signaling and, thus, imperfect CSI . UE mobility is modelled as a
fast-fading component rather than a change in position on the network
map.

A typical simulation consists of a large number of independent trials
executed in Monte Carlo fashion, i.e. in parallel, thus yielding
statistical outcomes over all trials. A flowchart of the most important
steps involved in a simulation run is provided in Fig. 2.12 . To ensure
sufficient consideration of interference, data is only collected from
cells which are surrounded by at least two layers (tiers) of cells
causing interference.

The simulators which produced the results presented in Chapters 3 and 4
were written as MATLAB [ 01a, a ] scripts. Required packages are the
Optimization and Statistics Toolboxes. An optional package is the
Parallel Computing Toolbox. The network simulator employed in Chapter 5
was written in python [ 01, a ] using numpy, scipy, matplotlib,
virtualenv, IPOPT , ATLAS, LAPACK, MKL and ACML libraries. Depending on
the network size, extensive simulation runs can take up to several days
on a parallelized system. Unlike the highly optimized convex
optimization processes, computation of SINRs and data handling are very
time consuming, causing long simulation run times.

### 2.6 Summary

This chapter served to provide the motivation for BS power saving,
establish the literature context, and briefly introduce key technical
concepts. To begin with, it was explained that cellular BSs contribute
significantly to the power consumption and @xmath emission of mobile
networks and that they do so during operation. Low load situations, such
as night time, were identified as opportunities for reducing BS power
consumption. The necessity of observing BS design along with BS
operation for power saving was emphasized which is reflected in the
structure of this thesis. Next, the Green Radio literature was
discussed. In the last part of this chapter, key technical concepts were
introduced which reappear in the following chapters. LTE , multicarrier
and multiple antenna technology, and convex optimization are all
important topics applied in this thesis. Furthermore, the computer
simulation of cellular networks was described in detail as it was used
for producing numerical results where analytical solutions could not be
found.

## Chapter 3 Power Saving on the Device Level

### 3.1 Overview

Power models describe how much power a device consumes in different
configurations or scenarios. Depending on their depth, power models may
also reveal architectural details and allow comparisons between
different scenarios or assist the exploration of configurations which
are not available for measurement in laboratories.

In energy efficiency research, power models are the basis of any power
consumption analysis. Solid models are required to produce reliable
results, since the model assumptions significantly affect the energy
efficiency solutions proposed. For example, if a model were to falsely
describe heat dissipation as a major contributor to power consumption,
research efforts with regard to the reduction of heat dissipation might
be ineffectively spent. Therefore, it is immensely important to have
reliable power models such as the ones presented in this chapter.

In this chapter, three levels of detail of a power model for LTE BSs are
derived. The reason is that higher levels of detail allow ensuring the
reliability of the model, manipulating specific aspects and parameters
and recognizing the underlying architecture. In contrast, lower levels
of detail abstract the model specifics in favor of applicability. The
goal of this chapter is to allow the reader to first follow the
construction of the component model and later the simplification towards
the affine model.

The remainder of this chapter is structured as follows. Section 3.2
summarizes the challenges encountered when modeling BS power
consumption. Existing power models are discussed in Section 3.3 .
Section 3.4 describes the component power model in detail. This model
reveals the sources of power consumption within cellular BSs . In
Section 3.5 , the complex component model is parameterized into a
parameterized power model such that only those parameters which are
often manipulated for power saving remain, greatly reducing the model
complexity. In Section 3.6 , an affine power model approximation is
defined. The affine mapping contained in this model allows integrating
it into analytical problems in Chapters 4 and 5 . Section 3.7 summarizes
the chapter and compares the three models with regard to their
complexity.

The component model was developed in collaboration with the EARTH
project. Hardware manufacturers have provided the experimental data on
individual components. The author of this thesis has contributed to this
power model by capturing it in MATLAB source code and aligning its
concurrent development between EARTH partners. The model has been
published and applied in parts in [ EARTH Project Work Package 2, 2010 ,
Auer et al. , 2011a , Auer et al. , 2011b , Desset et al. , 2012 ] . The
detailed description of the model in this chapter is an original
contribution. The parameterized model has been submitted for publication
in [ Holtkamp et al. , 2013b ] .

### 3.2 Challenges in Power Modeling

Generic modeling of BS power consumption is not a trivial task for
multiple reasons. First, in order to protect their industrial designs,
equipment vendors and manufacturers are hesitant to reveal the
architecture of their products. They go so far as to contractually
prohibit the opening of device casings for customers. Consequently, it
is difficult to understand the contributing components to power
consumption within cellular BSs . Second, vendors and manufacturers have
differing designs, such that a power model may either only be valid for
a single brand of devices or that multiple models would have to be
developed. Third, architectures and technologies continually evolve,
weakening the long-term applicability of power models. As such, a
particular model may only be valid for a certain generation of BSs .

All of these problems have been addressed in the component power model
as follows: By the combined effort of experts from multiple
manufacturers, general common architectures were agreed upon without
revealing competitive technical differences. These common architectures
also helped bridge the design differences present between competing
manufacturers. Finally, to ensure the lasting applicability of the
model, foreseen technical advances were included in the model. As LTE is
the prominent cellular network technology of the coming decade (see
Section 2.5 ), the component power model describes an LTE BS .

The data sets provided in this chapter were all obtained through
measurements within the EARTH project.

### 3.3 Existing Power Models

In the literature, three distinct power models for wireless transmitters
are proposed and applied.

While in need of a power model for the comparison of the power
efficiency of MIMO with Single-Input Single-Output ( SISO )
transmission, Cui et al. [ Cui et al. , 2004 ] derived a first
technology-independent model for the total power consumption of a
generic radio transceiver. It was established that power consumption can
be divided into the power consumption of the PA and the power
consumption of all other circuit blocks. The power consumption of the PA
was described to vary with transmission settings like the number of
antennas, the energy per bit, the bit rate, and the channel gain, while
the consumption of circuit blocks was assumed a constant. Note that this
power model is not a power model for cellular BSs , but for a generic
wireless transceiver. Yet, it represents the first steps towards
modeling the power consumption of wireless devices.

Arnold et al. [ Arnold et al. , 2010 ] derive the power consumption of
cellular BSs by considering that a typical BS consists of multiple
sectors, has multiple PAs , a cooling unit, and a power supply loss. The
remaining components’ consumption is considered a constant. This model
is accurate in its assumptions. But it only has data available for GSM
and UMTS BSs . For LTE , the model is based on predictions and differs
significantly from the values presented in this chapter.

Deruyck et al. [ Deruyck et al. , 2012 ] used extensive experimental
measurements to determine the power consumption of several types of SotA
BSs , like the macro cell, micro cell and femto cell. The power
consumption of a BS is assumed to be a constant, independent of the
traffic load. Thus, this model is not suitable for the exploration of BS
operating power consumption as is required in Chapters 4 and 5 .

The model described in the following has partly been published as an
element of an EARTH project deliverable [ EARTH Project Work Package 2,
2010 ] . It has been published in abbreviated form in [ Auer et al. ,
2011a , Auer et al. , 2011b , Desset et al. , 2012 ] .

### 3.4 The Component Power Model

Before the description of the model, it is necessary to make some
introductory remarks.

#### 3.4.1 Remarks

First, this model describes the supply power consumption of a LTE
cellular BS and is derived as the sum of the consumption of its
subcomponents. The consumption of each subcomponent is derived from
experimental measurements. The prediction of the dependence on operating
parameters is derived from their architecture.

Second, the model is an instantaneous model. It does not model effects
which occur over time, such as power up or power down. Rather it models
instantaneous power consumption at a certain configuration. When
estimating power consumption over a time duration consisting of
different configurations, a weighted averaging of the instantaneous
values needs to be performed.

Third, this model encompasses the architecture of an LTE BS entering the
market in the year 2012. For figures in this chapter, the system
parameters in Table 3.1 are used. It represents the architecture found
in most BSs which is foreseen to remain unchanged for the coming five to
ten years. Note that this chapter is not concerned with how the hardware
could be improved. Such hardware improvements were published in [ EARTH
Project Work Package 4, 2012 ] .

#### 3.4.2 The Components of a Bs

The modelled LTE macro BS consists of a transceiver with multiple
antennas. The transceiver comprises one or more lossy antenna
interfaces, PAs and Radio Frequency ( RF ) transceiver sections as well
as one BB interface including both a receiver section for uplink and
transmitter section for downlink, one Direct Current ( DC )- DC power
supply regulation, one active cooling system and one mains Alternating
Current ( AC )- DC power supply for connection to the electrical power
grid. Fig. 3.1 shows an illustration.

In practice, a BS may be serving multiple cells by sectorization. In
that case, there may be overlap between the components and the sectors.
For example, a single cooling cabinet may be used to house the
electronics for all sectors. However, for purposes of modeling, it is
assumed that a BS only serves a single cell. Thus, the power consumption
of a BS for multiple cells can be found as the sum of the individuals.

In currently prevailing architecture as portrayed in Fig. 3.1 , the BS
contains one or multiple so-called radio chains each consisting of one
RF transceiver, one PA and one antenna. Thus, the number of radio
chains, antennas, PAs , and RF transceivers is identical and terminology
can be used interchangeably.

In the following, the power consumption of each individual component is
inspected to generate the component power model for the entire BS .
Components are treated from right to left as depicted in Fig. 3.1 .

##### Antenna Interface

This passive component is listed here for completeness, although it has
no power consumption characteristics. For macro BS with long feeder
cables between the PA and the antenna, a feeder loss has to be
compensated for, which typically reduces the signal power by around
3 dB. For the model, this feeder loss is included in the modeling of the
PA .

##### Pa

The PA amplifies the signal before it is transmitted by the antenna. Due
to low achievable efficiencies, PAs contribute significantly to the
overall power consumption if high powers are targeted at the antenna, as
described in Section 2.2 .

Note that when comparing transmission powers in this study, it is
referred to as the sum measured at the inputs of all antenna interfaces.
Thus, feeder cable losses are included and BSs with differing numbers of
antennas can be compared fairly with regard to their transmission power.

Due to its non-linearity, the PA modeling involves measurement results
of the power-added efficiency. The power-added efficiency of the PA is
looked up during modeling via the function @xmath . The efficiency
function is shown in Fig. 3.2 . The efficiency of the PA can reach up to
54% at very high transmission powers. However, these high efficiencies
can rarely be achieved in operation due to the strong transmission power
fluctuation of OFDMA signals and power control. At low transmission
powers, PAs have very low efficiencies. This effect cancels the power
saving of power control to some degree.

At constant power spectral density, the power output of each PA , @xmath
in W, is a function of the transmission power, @xmath in W, the number
of antennas, @xmath , the share of the maximum bandwidth used for
transmission, @xmath , and an adjustment for feeder losses, @xmath is
given as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath The power output of a single PA in W \nomenclature @xmath Share
of available bandwidth used for transmission \nomenclature @xmath Feeder
loss \nomenclature @xmath Number of BS antennas/radio chains

The power consumption of the PAs in W is then determined by the
efficiency and the number of PAs , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of all PAs in a BS in W \nomenclature @xmath PA
efficiency

The power consumption in sleep mode, @xmath in W, scales with the number
of PAs . The power consumption of one PA in sleep mode, @xmath , was
found by experimental measurement, such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath W. \nomenclature @xmath Power consumption of all PAs in a BS
in sleep mode in W \nomenclature @xmath Power consumption of a PA in
sleep mode in W

The power consumption of the PA over @xmath is shown in Fig. 3.3 . The
effect of the reduced PA efficiency at lower transmission powers results
in an almost linear relationship of bandwidth/transmission power to
power consumption. At a maximum of 250 W, the PAs can consume a
significant amount of power. However, this can be mitigated by reducing
the transmission bandwidth. Also, as an analog component, a PA can be
switched to a sleep mode with low power consumption quickly which has
just above 50 W power consumption.

##### Rf Transceiver

The RF transceiver provides the signal conversion between the digital
and analog domain as well as frequency conversion between the BB and RF
frequencies. It consists of a large number of elements such as
In-phase/Quadrature ( IQ )-Modulators, voltage-controlled oscillators,
mixers, Digital-to-Analog Converters and Analog-to-Digital Converters ,
low-noise and variable gain amplifiers and clocks. Power consumption of
each of these elements is independent of external factors in
measurement. The values and the resulting sum consumption are shown in
Table 3.2 . Thus, the power consumption of the RF transceiver is
modelled as a constant. As one RF transceiver is installed in each
antenna chain, RF power consumption scales with the number of antenna
chains.

The power consumption of all RF transceivers, @xmath in W, is modelled
as a linear function of an individual transceiver, @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath in W is comprised of reference values for commercially
available components as shown in Table 3.2 . A technology scaling
factor, @xmath , is included to account for different generations of RF
transceivers. \nomenclature @xmath Power consumption of all RF
transceivers in W \nomenclature @xmath Power consumption of an RF
transceiver in W

The RF transceiver as present in currently manufactured BSs is incapable
of sleep mode operation. Therefore, its power consumption in sleep mode
is equal to its power consumption when active.,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of all RF transceivers in sleep mode in W

The power consumption of the RF transceiver is shown as a function of
@xmath in Fig. 3.4 . Since it is constant, it can only be manipulated
through the number of RF transceivers in operation. Sleep mode operation
is not yet foreseen for RF transceivers.

##### Bb Unit

The BB unit generates and processes the digital signal before it is
passed to the RF transceiver. The BB unit of macro BSs is typically a
stand-alone system-on-chip based on flexible Field-Programmable Gate
Array ( FPGA ) architecture. Since this component is a digital
processor, it is best modelled by its operations, namely by Giga
Operations Per Second ( GOPS ). As the power cost of GOPS can be
estimated at 40 GOPS /W and a set of different functions of the BB unit,
@xmath , can be associated with the number of GOPS required, the power
consumption can be modelled. \nomenclature @xmath Set of subcomponents
of the BB unit Unlike in other BS components, the BB unit scales
non-linearly with @xmath and @xmath . For example, the frequency domain
processing complexity grows exponentially with the number of antennas.
The exact scaling exponents along with the reference complexities for
the modeling of BB operations are shown in Table 3.3 .

These reference values and scaling exponents are used to find the BB
unit power consumption in W, with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath in W is the power consumption per sub-component, @xmath is
the scaling exponent for the number of radio chains, and @xmath is the
scaling exponent for the share of bandwidth used, each as provided in
Table 3.3 . \nomenclature @xmath Power consumption of the BB unit in W
\nomenclature @xmath Reference power consumption of a BB subcomponent
@xmath in W \nomenclature @xmath Scaling exponent for BB power
consumption which depends on the number of antennas \nomenclature @xmath
Scaling exponent for BB power consumption which depends on the share of
available bandwidth used

The sleep mode power consumption of the BB units, @xmath in W, is lower
than when in active mode, as time domain and frequency domain processing
can be disabled as indicated by the sleep mode switch, @xmath . Like the
active power consumption, sleep mode power consumption is found by the
combination of reference values and scaling exponents,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of the BB unit during sleep mode in W
\nomenclature @xmath Sleep mode switch for the calculation of BB power
consumption

When drawn over the transmission bandwidth, see Fig. 3.5 , the power
consumption of the BB unit is found to be only lightly affected by load,
i.e. the bandwidth used. However, sleep modes are available for the BB
which can reduce its power consumption by more than 30%. MIMO operation
has a significant effect on the BB power consumption, as it is modelled
with a quadratic scaling factor due to the added computational
complexity of MIMO processing.

##### Dc-Dc-Conversion

To supply the required DC voltages for the various components mentioned
above, a BS is equipped with several DC - DC -converters. As the
architectures of these converters may vary across vendors, the
conversion is modelled as a single component. Laboratory measurements
have been taken from one representative DC - DC -converter during the
EARTH project as a function of the required load. Conversion has an
efficiency of less than one, which can also be represented as a loss.
With the DC - DC -converter built for a maximum power output of @xmath
in W, the loss is larger the further the actual required power by the PA
, RF transceiver and BB unit is from @xmath . See Fig. 3.6 for the
measured losses function, @xmath , of the ratio of maximum power output
to actual power output, @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Ratio of used to maximum output power by the DC - DC -converter
\nomenclature @xmath Maximum output power of the DC - DC -converter in W

The power consumption caused by DC - DC -conversion in W is then found
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of DC - DC -conversion in W \nomenclature
@xmath Efficiency of DC - DC -conversion; a function of @xmath

SotA DC - DC -converters are assumed to possess no capability for sleep
modes and, thus, remain activated during BS sleep mode, with power
consumption during sleep mode, @xmath in W,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of DC - DC -conversion in sleep mode in W

The power consumption of the DC - DC -converter is shown as a function
of @xmath in Fig. 3.7 . It is directly dependent on the components the
DC - DC -converter powers and varies by less than 20% over all
bandwidths. The reduced power consumption in sleep mode is only a
passive effect and not an active switching process.

##### Mains Supply/Ac-Dc-Conversion

Power from the AC mains grid is converted to DC by the mains power
supply unit. This unit is measured and modelled in the same fashion as
DC - DC -conversion with conversion loss. See Fig. 3.8 for the measured
losses as a function of the ratio of maximum power output to actual
power output, @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath Ratio of used to maximum output power by the AC - DC -converter
\nomenclature @xmath Maximum output power of the AC - DC -converter in W

The power consumption caused by AC - DC -conversion is then found as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of AC - DC -conversion in W \nomenclature
@xmath Efficiency of AC - DC -conversion; a function of @xmath

SotA AC - DC -converters are assumed to possess no special adaptation to
sleep modes and, thus, remain activated during BS sleep mode, with power
consumption during sleep mode, @xmath in W,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of AC - DC -conversion in sleep mode in W

The power consumption of the AC - DC -converter is shown as a function
of @xmath in Fig. 3.9 . Although the converter has non-linear
efficiencies, these seem to compensate for the non-linearities of the
components it powers. As a result, the power consumption curve is close
to a straight line.

##### Cooling

Macro BSs are typically housed in a cooled cabinet. This cooling is a
very difficult effect to model. Cooling requirements vary greatly
between different geographic locations, positioning in or on buildings
and the size of the storage cabinet. Different vendors recommend
different operating temperatures for their devices and these
recommendations may not be followed by the network operators.
Furthermore, cooling is generally a very slow process compared to the
orders of timing in a BS . Thus, considering cooling at its
instantaneous power consumption may be misleading. As there is no simple
solution to this problem, cooling is modelled as a fixed power loss.

The heat dissipation of all other components needs to compensated for by
active cooling. This heat dissipation can be assumed to be proportional
to the power consumed. Thus, cooling power consumption is modelled to be
proportional to the consumption of all other components. With cooling
loss, @xmath , the power consumption of the cooling unit in W is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of active BS cooling in W \nomenclature @xmath
Cooling loss factor

In this model, there are no further assumptions with regard to cooling
during sleep mode. The power consumption of the cooling unit during
sleep mode, @xmath in W, is therefore identical, with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath Power consumption of active BS cooling in sleep mode in W

The power consumption of the cooling unit as a function of @xmath is
shown in Fig. 3.10 . As it depends on all other components, it follows
their power consumption behavior and is almost affine.

#### 3.4.3 Bs Power Consumption

The power consumption, @xmath in W, of an entire LTE BS is found as the
sum of its components. With @xmath the number of sectors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath BS supply power consumption in W \nomenclature @xmath Number of
sectors on a macro BS

It is illustrated in Fig. 3.11 for @xmath . Fig. 3.12 provides a
normalized comparison of the shares of power consumption at the two edge
points of Fig. 3.11 , namely at zero and at full bandwidth.

In both cases, for @xmath and @xmath , respectively, the largest
contributors to power consumption, especially at full bandwidth
transmission, are found to be the PAs with 56.6% and 53.7%. At zero
bandwidth, with 25.8% and 28.5%, the PAs still consume a larger share of
the power than other components, but significantly less than for higher
transmission bandwidths. Therefore, reducing the PA power consumption
significantly affects the power consumption of the entire device.

With regard to sleep modes, for @xmath and @xmath , respectively, they
are estimated to lower consumption to 322 W and 583 W compared to an
overall consumption of 437 W and 771 W at zero bandwidth, and 1025 W and
1419 W at full bandwidth usage. That corresponds to a reduction of power
consumption by 26% and 24% at zero bandwidth and by 69% and 59% at full
bandwidth usage. Thus, sleep modes can reduce the supply power
consumption significantly, especially in high load operation.

Overall, it is important to recognize that the power consumption of a BS
is far from constant and can be varied through operation parameters by
as much as 69%. To reduce its power consumption, it should be operated
with low power, low bandwidth or in sleep mode. In addition, the slope
of the variation is nearly constant over @xmath for both one and dual
antenna operation. This allows for a greatly simplified power
consumption model.

The power model described in this section can be generated for other
than macro BS types such as micro, pico, femto or Remote Radio Head (
RRH ) in similar fashion. However, as this thesis is only concerned with
the power consumption of macro type BSs , these types are not discussed
here.

### 3.5 The Parameterized Power Model

The power model described above is very useful for purposes of
derivation, understanding, calibration and exploration of changes in
architecture. The effect of changes to individual components on the
power consumption of the entire BS can be studied. However, it is often
unnecessary to derive the power consumption of a BS from the component
level up. When exploring power saving techniques, only few parameters
are varied regularly while many remain constant for an entire study. To
address this need, this section proposes a simpler, parameterized power
model. It abstracts architectural details for simplicity and only keeps
those parameters which are regularly altered. It is based on the
identification of power saving techniques.

In the literature, specific power saving techniques are suggested:
namely, the effects of the number of antennas on power consumption [ Cui
et al. , 2004 ] , the reduction of transmission power [ Holtkamp et al.
, 2011a , López-Pérez et al. , 2011 , Miao et al. , 2008a ] , the
deactivation of unneeded antennas [ Hedayati et al. , 2012 , Xu et al. ,
2011 ] , the adaptation of the transmission bandwidth [ Ashraf et al. ,
2011 , Ambrosy et al. , 2012 ] and the use of low power consumption
sleep modes of varied durations [ Frenger et al. , 2011 , Abdallah
et al. , 2012 , Videv & Haas, 2011 , de Domenico, 2012 ] .

The parameterized model encompasses all of these approaches to allow a
direct comparison while abstracting parameters which can either be
assumed to be constant or have little effect in the studied scenarios,
such as GOPS , lookup tables, equipment manufacturing details or leakage
powers. To this extent, only the following is covered in the proposed
model:

-   The different BS types of a heterogeneous network are modelled by
    applying different parameter sets to the same model equations.

-   The number of transmission antennas and radio chains affects
    consumption during design and operation.

-   The same holds true for transmission power, which affects the design
    indirectly by choice of a suitable power amplifier as well as the
    operation directly.

-   Also, transmission bandwidth and sleep modes are modelled to allow
    the investigation of their impact on BS power consumption.

For parameterization, the maximum supply power consumption, @xmath in W,
is first found establishing how power consumption scales with bandwidth,
@xmath , the number of BS radio chains/antennas, @xmath , and the
maximum transmission power, @xmath . This requires the consideration the
main units of a BS as presented earlier: PA , RF small-signal
transceiver, BB unit, DC-DC converter, mains supply and active cooling.
Summarizing Section 3.4 , the dependence of the BS units on @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath can be approximated as follows:

-   Both BB and RF power consumption, @xmath in W and @xmath in W,
    respectively, are assumed to scale nearly linearly with bandwidth,
    @xmath , and the number of BS antennas, @xmath .

-   The PA power consumption, @xmath , depends on the maximum
    transmission power per antenna, @xmath , and the PA efficiency,
    @xmath . Also, possible feeder cable losses, @xmath , have to be
    accounted for, such that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Losses incurred by DC - DC conversion, AC - DC conversion and active
    cooling scale linearly with the power consumption of other
    components and may be approximated by the constant loss factors
    @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively.

\nomenclature

@xmath PA efficiency in the parameterized model \nomenclature @xmath BS
maximum sum transmission power in W

These assumptions allow calculating the maximum power consumption of a
BS sector,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath Loss factor for AC - DC -conversion in the parameterized model
\nomenclature @xmath Loss factor for DC - DC -conversion in the
parameterized model \nomenclature @xmath Loss factor for active cooling
in the parameterized model \nomenclature @xmath Power consumption of the
PAs in the parameterized model \nomenclature @xmath Power consumption of
the RFs transceivers in the parameterized model \nomenclature @xmath
Power consumption of the BB units in the parameterized model

An important characteristic of a PA is that operation at lower transmit
powers reduces the efficiency of the PA and that, consequently, power
consumption is not a linear function of the PA output power. This is
resolved by taking into account the ratio of maximum transmission power
of a PA from its data sheet, @xmath in W, to the maximum transmission
power of the PA during operation, @xmath . In typical PAs , the current
transmission power can be adjusted by adapting the DC supply voltage,
which impacts the offset power of the PA . The efficiency is assumed to
decrease by a factor of @xmath for each halving of the transmission
power. The efficiency is thus maximal when @xmath in single antenna
transmission and is heuristically well-described by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the maximum PA efficiency. \nomenclature @xmath Maximum
PA efficiency in the parameterized model \nomenclature @xmath PA
efficiency decrease \nomenclature @xmath Maximum output power of the PA
in W

The reduction of power consumption in sleep mode is achieved by powering
off PAs and reduced computations necessary in the BB engine. For
simplicity, only the dependence on @xmath is modelled as each PA is
powered off. Thus, @xmath , is approximated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a reference value for the single antenna BS chosen such
that @xmath matches the complex model power consumption for two
antennas. \nomenclature @xmath Reference value for the single antenna BS
sleep mode power consumption in W

It can be approximated from Fig. 3.11 to treat the supply power
consumption as an affine function of the bandwidth and, thus,—given
constant power spectral density—of the transmission power. In other
words, the consumption can be represented by a static (load-independent)
share, @xmath in W, with an added load-dependent share that increases
linearly by a power gradient, @xmath , see Figure 3.13 . The maximum
supply power consumption, @xmath in W, is reached when transmitting at
maximum total transmission power, @xmath . Furthermore, a BS may enter a
sleep mode with lowered consumption, @xmath , when it is not
transmitting. Total power consumption considering the number of sectors,
@xmath , is then formulated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The scaling parameter, @xmath , is the load share, where
@xmath indicates a fully loaded system, e.g. transmitting at full power
and full bandwidth, and @xmath indicates an idle system. \nomenclature
@xmath BS power consumption at maximum load in W \nomenclature @xmath
Power consumption load factor \nomenclature @xmath Transmission load
share \nomenclature @xmath BS power consumption in sleep mode in W
\nomenclature @xmath Idle BS power consumption (at zero transmission
power) in W

The parameterized power model is applied to approximate the consumption
of the BS which was described in the component model. Parameters are
chosen where possible according to [ Auer et al. , 2011b ] , such as
losses, efficiencies and power limits. The remaining parameters are
adapted such that a closer match to the component model could be
achieved. The resulting parameter breakdown is provided in Table 3.4 .
The two power models are compared over @xmath for one and two antennas
in Figure 3.14 . Although two parameters, the bandwidth and the number
of BS antennas, are varied, the parameterized model can be seen to
closely approximate the complex model for all BS types. The largest
deviation of the parameterized model from the complex model occurs when
modeling four transmit antennas. This is caused by the fact that the
parameterized model considers a constant slope, @xmath , which is
independent of @xmath . In contrast, the PA efficiency in the complex
model decreases with rising @xmath , leading to an increasing slope
which can not be matched by a constant slope. This deviation is a
trade-off between simplicity and model accuracy.

In addition to providing a solid reference, the model and the parameters
can provide a basis for exploration. Individual parameters can be
changed to observe the resulting variation in power consumption. With
regard to the number of antennas, the parameterized model can only be
verified up to four antennas, which is the extent of the complex model.
Extending the system bandwidth, for example to 20 MHz, is expected to
increase the BB and RF power consumption. The other parameters such as
the transmission power and losses are expected to remain unaffected by
different system bandwidths. Adapting the design maximum transmission
power, @xmath , affects the PA efficiencies, which decrease with @xmath
.

### 3.6 The Affine Power Model

In preparation for the following chapters of this thesis, one more
simplification to power modeling is made. When the input parameters for
( 3.18 ) and ( 3.20 ) are not changed, the power model can be reduced to
( 3.21 ) as a function of the load @xmath . When considering AA , a
separation has to be made depending on @xmath . This simplification
carries the benefit of turning the power model into an affine function.
As will be shown in the next chapter, the treatment of power consumption
as an affine function maintains convexity.

Let the general affine model be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . \nomenclature @xmath BS power consumption at maximum load
in the affine model in W \nomenclature @xmath Idle BS power consumption
(at zero transmission power) in the affine model in W \nomenclature
@xmath BS power consumption in sleep mode in the affine model in W

For the remainder of this thesis, power consumption will therefore be
modelled according to ( 3.22 ). This is a combination of the
parameterized affine function and the component model sleep mode value
in Fig. 3.14 .

For later reference, the affine power model for a single antenna BS is
explicitly written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The affine power model for a two-antenna BS is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

A tabular summary is provided in Table 3.5 .

### 3.7 Summary

In this chapter, three different power models have been derived, namely
the component model, the parameterized model, and the affine model. The
component model was derived by first defining the architecture of a
typical LTE BS and then inspecting each component with regard to its
power consumption. The PA was found to have a power consumption which
strongly depends on the transmission power with some capability for
sleep mode. The RF transceiver in its current implementation has limited
adaptability and, therefore, constant power consumption. The BB unit’s
power consumption is determined by the internal computing operations,
some of which can be reduced for power saving. The power consumption
components such as power conversions and cooling, strongly depends on
the power consumption of other components. Altogether, the power
consumption of the individual components comprises the component BS
power model. While very detailed and necessary for derivation, the
component model is too elaborate for many uses. To address this
complexity, the parameterized power model was derived from it, which
only considers typical operating parameters while abstracting
architectural and technical details. It was shown to closely approximate
the component model for a range of parameters. Instead of using measured
data ranges containing many values in the model, all input parameters
are generalized to scalars (single values). When employed in an
analytical context, a further fixation of input parameters is advisable,
yielding the affine model. Overall, the number of input parameters
including experimental data was reduced from 15 parameters (out of which
8 are data ranges) in the component model to 14 scalar parameters in the
parameterized model and to four scalar parameters in the affine model.
See Table 3.6 on page 3.6 for the detailed comparison.

## Chapter 4 Power Saving on the Cell Level (Single-cell)

### 4.1 Overview

As introduced in Chapter 2 , current cellular systems are capacity
optimized with little consideration of the power consumed. In contrast,
for power saving, networks need to be efficiency optimized. The
difference between a power efficient and a capacity maximizing system is
that a power efficient system only consumes the resources that are
needed while a capacity maximizing system consumes those that are
available . As described in Section 2.2 , cellular systems are rarely
fully loaded and at times completely unloaded [ Sandvine, 2010 ] . This
implies that not all of the bandwidth, time or transmission power are
needed. The power-saving RRM mechanisms proposed in this chapter address
this issue and exploit spare capacity to increase the system efficiency.

In this chapter the previously established power models are applied to
study power-saving BS operation. Section 4.2 discusses the SotA of
power-saving RRM in the literature. It is then identified in Section 4.3
how a transmission consumes power and which parameters should be
optimized to minimize consumption on the basis of general communication
theory. Trade-offs are identified between TDMA and PC . In Section 4.4 ,
the solution to multi-user BS PC is proposed and studied. Once the
system is optimized with regard to PC , DTX is added to further drive
down power consumption via joint optimization. The general real-valued
TDMA solution is derived. In Section 4.5 , the convex optimization
problem is then extended into a single-cell multi-user MIMO OFDMA
power-saving algorithm. The chapter is summarized in Section 4.6 .

The material presented in this chapter has previously been published or
submitted for publication in [ Holtkamp & Auer, 2011 , Holtkamp et al. ,
2011b , Holtkamp et al. , 2011a , Holtkamp et al. , 2013a , Wu et al. ,
2012a ] .

### 4.2 Power-saving Rrm in Literature

In the literature, PC is the most prominent power-saving RRM mechanism
with numerous proposals for a range of different problems, for example
the related works in [ Sinanović et al. , 2007 , Wong et al. , 1999 ,
Miao et al. , 2008b , Kivanc et al. , 2003 , Al-Shatri & Weber, 2010 ] .
This prominence is due to the fact that, in addition to reducing power
consumption, PC is also beneficial to link adaptation and interference
reduction. Sinanović et al. [ Sinanović et al. , 2007 ] explore the
optimal power points in a network with two interfering links and provide
a communication theoretic basis for this work. Wong et al. [ Wong et al.
, 1999 ] minimize transmit power for multi-user OFDM under rate
constraints. Although their work is pioneering, it has the drawbacks
that the PC algorithm is computationally complex and does not consider a
transmit power constraint or a power model. Miao et al. [ Miao et al. ,
2008b ] presented an early work on efficiency in which they derive the
uplink data rate which maximizes the transmitted information per unit
energy (bit per joule). Kivanc et al. [ Kivanc et al. , 2003 ] allocate
subcarriers such that transmission powers are reduced. Their algorithm
is modified and applied in this chapter. Al-Shatri et al. [ Al-Shatri &
Weber, 2010 ] approach sum rate maximization by using margin-adaptive
power allocation, a method which is also used towards the end of this
chapter.

More recently, acknowledging the significance of
transmission-power-independent power consumption for energy efficiency,
DTX and AA have been identified as promising energy saving RRM
techniques. The term DTX refers to an interruption of transmission which
can be used to enter a short sleep mode. This interruption can be short
enough to be unnoticeable to a receiver and fit into an OFDMA frame.
This allows to schedule DTX flexibly without affecting the UE . Thus,
DTX carries the benefit of not increasing delay or inhibiting discovery
compared to longer sleep modes. DTX is first proposed in [ Frenger
et al. , 2011 ] . To the best of the author’s knowledge, there are no
prior works which consider DTX in combination with other power saving
RRM mechanism. With regard to AA , Cui et al. analyze the energy
efficiency of MIMO transmissions, being the first to consider the supply
power consumption in energy efficient operation [ Cui et al. , 2004 ] .
They show that in terms of energy efficiency, the optimal number of
transmit antennas used for MIMO transmission is not the highest by
default, but rather depends on the SNR . Kim et al. [ Kim et al. , 2009
] establish AA as a MIMO resource allocation problem and adapt the
number of transmit antennas on a single link. However, solutions
provided for AA on the link level cannot be directly applied to the BS ,
since for the latter multiple transmissions are active simultaneously on
the same set of antennas. Xu et al. [ Xu et al. , 2011 ] propose a
convex optimization scheme to reduce the number of transmission antennas
during transmission. A related approach is applied in this chapter to
the optimization of sleep modes. Hedayati et al. [ Hedayati et al. ,
2012 ] propose to perform AA without informing the receiver, thus
mimicking deep fades on some antennas. This is predicted to reduce power
consumption by up to 50%.

Note that—as mentioned in Chapter 2 —there is also a number of works
concerned with long sleep modes, such as [ Oh & Krishnamachari, 2010 ,
Ashraf et al. , 2011 , Vereecken et al. , 2012 , Xiang et al. , 2011 ] .
In comparison with DTX , such long sleep modes are applied for minutes,
hours or days. This increases the achievable power saving, as devices
are completely turned off. However, long sleep modes cause problems with
coverage and discovery, as two communication devices may be completely
unaware of one another. Also, such sleep modes clearly affect the QoS ,
unless redundant network elements exist. Thus, they are not considered
here. The work presented in this chapter can be combined with long sleep
modes as part of future work as the two are not mutually exclusive.

### 4.3 Pc and Tdma

When the number of bits transmitted on a link with fixed bandwidth and
optimal modulation and coding is to be increased, there are two options:
either to increase the link rate by raising the transmission power or to
transmit for a longer time. From a power efficiency perspective,
providing a fixed rate is thus a trade-off between transmit power and
transmission duration. A higher power for smaller duration can provide
the same rate as a lower power with higher transmission duration.
Therefore, for power minimization on a single link, transmission should
always be as long as possible to allow for the lowest transmit power.
However, in a shared multi-user channel with orthogonal access, such as
TDM , FDM , or OFDM , all links have to be considered which each have
individual rate requirements that have to be fulfilled in a given time.
This problem is illustrated in Fig. 4.1 for two links. Which combination
of transmission duration and transmission power achieves the lowest
overall power consumption is the problem discussed in this section.

##### Power allocation on the link level

It follows a derivation of the power optimal allocation strategy of
transmission power and time for a single link. The Shannon bound [
Shannon, 1948 ] —as one of the most fundamental laws in
communications—is employed to map transmission power to achievable rate.
It is assumed that in a cellular system a set of mobiles with known
channel gains has a set of rate requirements that needs to be fulfilled.

A cell consists of one BS and @xmath links (mobiles). The capacity in
bps per link @xmath is upper bounded by the Shannon bound as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Capacity on link @xmath in bps \nomenclature @xmath SNR on link
@xmath \nomenclature @xmath Channel gain on link @xmath \nomenclature
@xmath Transmission power on link @xmath in W \nomenclature @xmath
Thermal noise power in W \nomenclature @xmath Boltzmann constant in
@xmath \nomenclature @xmath Operating temperature in K \nomenclature
@xmath Link or user indexwhere @xmath is the channel bandwidth in Hz and
@xmath is the SNR with @xmath the link channel gain, @xmath the transmit
power on link @xmath in W and @xmath thermal noise power in W. The noise
power is defined as @xmath with Boltzmann constant @xmath and operating
temperature @xmath in Kelvin. While capacity and bandwidth are linearly
related, capacity and transmit power have a logarithmic relationship. As
a consequence it is much more expensive in terms of power to increase
the channel capacity than in terms of bandwidth. In other words, if
there is a choice between

1.  [label= )]

2.  leaving idle spectrum and transmitting at higher power, and

3.  using all available spectrum and transmitting at the lowest required
    power,

then the latter will always consume less overall transmit power.

##### Power allocation on the cell level

Next, an optimization problem is proposed which describes this notion
for @xmath users on a shared channel. Since all links in the system
share the available resources, the RRM of one link affects all others.
Thus, power-optimization can not be performed on the link level only,
but has to be approached from the cell level. \nomenclature @xmath
Number of users/links

Let the normalized transmission time per link be given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Normalized transmission time on link @xmath \nomenclature @xmath
Transmission time on link @xmath in s \nomenclature @xmath Frame
duration in swhere @xmath is the transmission time on link @xmath in
seconds, @xmath is the frame duration in seconds. Optimization of
normalized time rather than absolute time is chosen here as it results
in average power minimization and is more illustrative than energy
minimization (which is only meaningful for a known @xmath ).

The average capacity, @xmath , on link @xmath depends on @xmath and
@xmath , with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath indicates the average of @xmath .

Solving ( 4.1 ) for @xmath and combining with ( 4.3 ), the transmission
power on link @xmath in W as a function of the required average rate is
found to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath for some @xmath .

To account for the fact that all links are served by the BS orthogonally
within some time @xmath , the system average transmission power at the
BS for all links, @xmath , is the sum of individual transmit powers
weighted with the transmit duration, with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5a)
              @xmath      (4.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The combined duration of all transmissions must be less or equal to
@xmath . But since it is most efficient to use the entire available
@xmath as derived from ( 4.1 ), it holds that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, time has positive values and a power constraints must be
obeyed with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The allocation vector @xmath of transmission durations which minimizes (
4.5b ) is power optimal. \nomenclature @xmath Solution vector to the
time share problem

##### Evaluation

Next, the affine power model is taken into account, as it is important
to consider transmission power in relationship with the consumption of
the entire BS . Instead of the transmission power, the supply power
consumption is minimized. With the power model from ( 3.22 ), the PC
cost function ( 4.5b ) and @xmath , the supply power consumption in W is
found to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.8)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Note that, against intuition, the power model has no effect on the
solution of ( 4.8 ), i.e. @xmath is equal for ( 4.5b ) and ( 4.8 ). As
the power model affects all links equally, the PC solution is the same
for any power model and, thus, any BS . However, although the solution
is independent of the hardware, the benefits of PC do strongly depend on
hardware. As a metric for characterizing hardware by the share of
load-dependent consumption of the overall consumption, the load
dependence of a BS is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Load dependence of a BS

Using this load dependence, the benefits of PC can be evaluated. Figure
4.2 shows the supply power in a cell with ten users for a range of load
dependence values after the application of the PC strategy in ( 4.5b ).
The slope of the power model @xmath was chosen for a representative set
of load dependences with @xmath for @xmath W and @xmath W, from ( 3.22
). Channel gains were calculated based on distance by the 3GPP path loss
model [ 3GPP, 2010a ] after dropping users uniformly on a disc with
250 m radius around the BS in the center. The problem ( 4.8 ) was solved
iteratively using the interior-point algorithm contained in the MATLAB
Optimization Toolbox. The remainder of the simulation parameters was set
as described in Table 4.1 .

As shown in Fig. 4.2 , the effectiveness of PC strongly depends on the
underlying hardware. A higher load dependence factor yields a lower
supply power consumption for PC . The effectiveness of PC in future BSs
therefore strongly depends on hardware developments.

Although PC is thus shown to provide significant saving potential in BSs
with high @xmath , like macro BSs , the power consumption of a device
employing PC is always lower bound by its idle power consumption, @xmath
. Even when transmission is stopped, a device employing only PC still
consumes a supply power consumption of @xmath . Thus, to further reduce
power consumption, a method is required which allows power consumption
to reach lower values than @xmath . This can be achieved by employing
sleep modes or—in the case of OFDMA scheduling— DTX .

### 4.4 Power and Resource Allocation Including Sleep (Prais)

This section introduces the PRAIS scheme, which combines three
techniques: PC , TDMA and DTX . See Figure 4.3 for an illustration of
PRAIS on two links.

The parameterized power model in Section 3.5 derived three general
mechanisms which affect the power consumption of BSs :

1.  The overall power emitted at the antenna(s), @xmath , affinely
    relates to supply power consumption, see ( 3.22 ).

2.  If the same BS is operated with fewer RF chains, it consumes less
    power, see Fig. 3.14 .

3.  If the BS is put into sleep mode, it consumes less power than in the
    active (idle) state with zero transmission power, see Fig. 3.14 .

These observations lead to the following intuitive saving strategies:

  PC  

    : Reduce transmission power.

  AA  

    : Reduce the number of RF chains.

  DTX  

    : Increase the time the BS spends in DTX .

The first and the last strategy are clearly opposing each other as lower
transmission powers lead to lower link rates and thus longer
transmission duration (for transmitting a certain number of bits),
whereas it would be beneficial for long DTX to have short transmissions.
The second and third strategy are related, as AA can be considered a
weak form of DTX which still allows transmission on a subset of antenna
elements. In this section, PC and DTX are jointly addressed. AA is
treated in the following section, Section 4.5 .

##### Joint Pc and Dtx

When employing DTX individually to minimize power consumption, the
optimal strategy is to serve all links at the maximum available
transmission power until target rates are fulfilled, and then set the BS
to DTX . Alternatively, when employing PC with TDMA individually for
maximum efficiency, the transmission duration is stretched over the
available time frame with the lowest power necessary to serve the
required rates. When PC and DTX are combined, there is a trade-off.
Between the two extremes of maximum transmit power with longest DTX and
lowest transmit power with no DTX , there are configurations with medium
transmit power and medium DTX duration that consume less supply power.

This can be illustrated graphically for a single link example, as shown
in Fig. 4.4 . Plotted is the supply power consumption caused by
transmitting a fixed number of bits. Let @xmath denote the share of time
spent transmitting. Three operation modes are defined: \nomenclature
@xmath Share of time spent transmitting instead of idling or DTX

-    PC : Only PC but no DTX is available. To this extent, the
    transmission power is adjusted depending on the transmission time
    normalized to the time slot duration, @xmath , such that the target
    rate is achieved. The BS consumes idle power @xmath when there is no
    data transmission. Clearly, the point of lowest power consumption in
    this case is at @xmath where the supply power consumption approaches
    @xmath . Lower values of @xmath increase the required transmission
    power, until at @xmath , @xmath .

-    DTX : The BS transmits with full power @xmath . Thus, the supply
    power is @xmath when transmitting or @xmath when in DTX mode,
    yielding an affine function of @xmath . At @xmath , a higher rate
    than the target rate is achieved. Reducing @xmath from @xmath
    decreases the supply power consumption linearly up to the point at
    which the target rate is met with equality. In this mode of
    operation, the best strategy is to minimize the time transmitting
    (small @xmath ), in order to maximize the time in DTX , ( @xmath ).
    In Fig. 4.4 , the point of lowest power consumption for this mode is
    at @xmath with 154 W.

-   Joint application of PC and DTX : In this mode of operation, the DTX
    time ( @xmath ) is gradually reduced. The transmission power is
    adjusted to meet the target rate within @xmath . Here, the point of
    lowest power consumption is at @xmath with 135 W.

Inspection of Fig. 4.4 reveals that the joint operation of PC and DTX
always consumes less power than either individual mode of operation with
an optimal point at @xmath . This is the power-saving benefit provided
by the joint optimization of PC and DTX .

##### Problem formulation

This section proceeds to derive the power consumption optimization
problem for a multi-user single-cell allocation of transmit powers, DTX
times and transmit durations contained within the PRAIS scheme. The
normalized time spent transmitting, @xmath , is defined as in ( 4.2 )
and the normalized duration spent in DTX is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

\nomenclature

@xmath Normalized time spent in DTX modewhere @xmath is the time spent
in DTX and \nomenclature @xmath Time spent in DTX in s

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining this with the consumption during DTX from ( 3.22 ) and ( 4.5b
) yields the following PRAIS optimization problem.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12a)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.12b)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.12c)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.12d)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.12e)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The constraints ( 4.12b ), ( 4.12c ), ( 4.12d ) reflect the facts that
normalized time has to be positive and its sum unity. Transmission
powers are positive and bounded by a maximum transmit power in ( 4.12e
). The cost function is a non-negative sum of functions that are convex
within the constraint domain and is therefore still convex. See Appendix
A.1 for a proof. It can be solved efficiently with appropriate software
like the MATLAB optimization toolbox. The solution of ( 4.12 )
determines the vector @xmath , which minimizes the overall power
consumption under target rates. Note that selecting @xmath is equivalent
to disabling DTX , i.e. employing PC individually similar to ( 4.8 ),
whereas fixating @xmath is equivalent to disabling PC .

The resource allocation problem ( 4.12 ) can be solved for any number of
users. Without loss of generality, a ten user scenario for numerical
evaluation is selected.

##### Evaluation

For the numerical analysis, the PRAIS scheme is evaluated in a Monte
Carlo simulation using the parameters shown in Table 4.1 . Users are
dropped uniformly onto a disk and the associated channel gains @xmath
are generated by applying the 3GPP urban macro path-loss model including
shadowing with a standard deviation of @xmath dB [ 3GPP, 2010a ] . In
addition to the individual DTX and PC allocation schemes and the PRAIS
scheme, two references that serve as upper limits are presented. First,
the maximum transmission power as defined by the LTE standard provides
the theoretical reference. Second, the reference against which gains are
measured is the power behavior of a BS as defined in the power models.
This is a Bandwidth Adaptation ( BA ) scheme where each user receives a
share of the frequency band as well as the entire considered time slot.
This can also be interpreted as ‘ DTX in the frequency domain’ where
@xmath .

For power modeling, representative of current and future developments,
the affine power model from Chapter 3 , a model from the literature and
a purely theoretical model are selected; the parameters are normalized
for a single sector, single sector and listed in Table 4.2 .

For an assessment of the relevance of DTX , an assumption is that DTX
will greatly improve, while standby component consumption cannot be
reduced substantially in the coming years [ Frenger et al. , 2011 ] .
This model is labelled the Frenger model . This model particularly
emphasizes DTX effects.

As a best-case example, the theoretical power model assumes idealized
components which scale perfectly with load. Power consumption is set to
scale almost linearly with load with near-zero stand-by consumption.
This model is not a prediction of technology advances, but provides
theoretical limits. Parameters are selected such that the power
consumption at full load matches the affine model.

The simulation results are shown in Figure 4.5 where the per-user link
rate is plotted against the average supply power consumption under the
different schemes. Figures 4.4(a) , 4.4(b) , 4.4(c) reflect the three
chosen power models.

It is found in Figure 4.4(a) that a SISO LTE BS consumes 186 W up to
340 W employing BA , which is considered the operation of the SotA . An
important albeit foreseen result is that the consumption curves of BA
and PC as well as DTX and PRAIS originate in the same values of @xmath
at low load. The higher one is @xmath at 186 W and the lower one @xmath
at 107 W. This is true for all power models and confirms that in an
empty cell, power consumption is determined by hardware and resource
allocation has no effect.

As shown in Fig. 4.4(a) , the application of PC only allows keeping the
overall consumption constant for a large set of low target rates. In
this rate region, transmit powers are very low compared to standby
consumption. Only when rates above 10 Mbps are targeted is the
transmission power high enough to make a noticeable difference compared
to the standby consumption. This is reflected in the rising PC only
curve at target rates above 10 Mbps. In contrast, the binary DTX scheme
(which transmits either at full power or not at all) has much lower
power consumption (up to @xmath %) than PC only or BA at low rates.
However, it rises much quicker than the PC only curve. There is a
crossover point at 5.6 Mbps between DTX and PC . The PRAIS scheme, which
joins PC and DTX , benefits from both individual schemes and has minimal
consumption over all rates. At higher target rates, the PRAIS
consumption curve joins the PC only curve. This reflects that it is not
feasible to put the BS to sleep at high rates. Employing the affine
power model, the PRAIS scheme achieves savings between 42% and 23% over
BA .

A surprising result is found in Figure 4.4(b) . Although application of
this model has a strong bias towards DTX effects, there remains a
cross-over point between DTX and PC after which the use of PC can still
save 19% of the supply power consumption in addition to DTX . In the
Frenger model, the PRAIS scheme offers between 91% savings at near-zero
rates and 23% savings at 15 Mbps.

In the future linear model shown in Figure 4.4(c) , the behavior of DTX
and BA , as well as PC and PRAIS , are identical, due to the fact that
there is no gain of sleep modes over standby consumption. BA consumption
is significantly lower than for all other power models. All benefits are
owed to PC which is strongly amplified by the linear model behavior,
delivering significant savings over all target rates.

Another finding evident from all figures is that there is no point of
‘full load’ in a cell which causes maximum power consumption. In theory,
when a cell is fully loaded—regardless of the resource allocation
scheme—the BS is expected to consume the maximum supply power, @xmath .
However, the chance that the set of target rates matches the given
channel conditions to generate a situation of ‘full load’ is extremely
low. It is much more probable that either the channels conditions are
good enough to have ‘almost full load’ or that the channel conditions
are too bad to fulfill the target rates, generating an overload or
outage situation. As target rates increase, the probability of the
latter increases. To cover only a representative set of target rates,
only those data points are plotted which contain less than 10%
overload/outage. Due to this outage, the simulated power consumption
never reaches the theoretical maximum. Thus, the selection of the
resource allocation scheme does in fact matter, even at near-full loads.

### 4.5 Resource allocation using Antenna adaptation, Power control and
Sleep modes (Raps)

To extend the previous analytical work into a comprehensive, practical
mechanism for current cellular systems like 3GPP LTE , the RAPS
algorithm is proposed in this section, which reduces the BS supply power
consumption of multi-user MIMO - OFDM . Given the channel states and
target rates per user, RAPS finds the number of transmit antennas, the
number of DTX time slots and the resource and power allocation per user.
The RAPS solution is found in two steps: First, PC , DTX and resource
allocation are joined into a convex optimization problem which can be
efficiently solved. Second, subcarrier and power allocation for a
frequency-selective time-variant channel pose a combinatorial problem,
which is solved by means of a heuristic solution.

One transmission frame is considered in the downlink of a
point-to-multipoint wireless communication system, comprising one
serving BS and multiple mobile receivers. The BS transmitter is equipped
with @xmath antennas and all antennas share the transmit power budget.
Mobile receivers have @xmath antennas and system resources are shared
via OFDMA between @xmath users on @xmath subcarriers and @xmath time
slots. In total, there are @xmath resource blocks as introduced in
Section 2.5.2 . A frequency-selective time-variant channel is assumed,
with each resource unit characterized by the channel state matrix,
@xmath , with subcarrier index @xmath , time slot index @xmath , user
index @xmath . The vector of spatial channel eigenvalues per resource
unit @xmath and user @xmath is @xmath and its cardinality is @xmath .
The system operates orthogonally such that individual resource units
cannot be shared among users. MIMO transmission with a variable number
of spatial streams is assumed over the set of resources assigned to each
user, @xmath . This frame structure is illustrated in Fig. 4.6 .
\nomenclature @xmath Subcarrier index \nomenclature @xmath Time slot
index \nomenclature @xmath Matrix of channel states on subcarrier @xmath
, time slot @xmath , link @xmath \nomenclature @xmath Vector of spatial
channel eigenvalues on resource block @xmath scheduled to user @xmath
\nomenclature @xmath Set of resources scheduled to user/link @xmath

The PC and DTX trade-off is extended to MIMO - OFDM serving multiple
users over frequency-selective channels. The selection of the number of
transmit antennas for AA is made once for the entire frame.

For power modeling of single antenna and dual antenna transmission, the
affine power models from Chapter 3 , ( 3.23 ) and ( 3.24 ) are employed.
It is assumed that the BS is equipped with two antennas out of which one
can be deactivated. Since the switch-off process is idealized to be
instantaneous, a DTX power consumption of @xmath W is assumed for both
single and dual antenna transmission.

#### 4.5.1 Problem Formulation

The global problem statement is formulated as follows. Given the channel
state matrices @xmath on each channel and the vector of target rates per
user @xmath , sought are:

-   the set of resources allocated to each user @xmath ,

-   the power level @xmath per resource block @xmath and the spatial
    channel eigenvalue @xmath with @xmath ,

-   and the number of active transmit antennas @xmath ,

such that the supply power consumption is minimized while fulfilling the
transmission power constraint, @xmath . \nomenclature @xmath Vector of
target rates, length @xmath \nomenclature @xmath Transmission power per
resource in W

Combining ( 4.1 ), ( 4.3 ) and ( 2.3a ), the sum capacity of user @xmath
over one transmission frame of duration @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with subcarrier bandwidth @xmath in Hz. \nomenclature @xmath Subcarrier
bandwidth in Hz

The BS RF transmission power in time slot @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the set of @xmath resources in time slot @xmath and
@xmath is the vector of channel eigenvalues on resource @xmath .

Given ( 3.22 ), ( 4.13 ) and ( 4.14 ), the optimization problem that
minimizes the supply power consumption is of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.15a)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.15b)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.15c)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.15d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the number of active transmission time slots @xmath , and DTX time
slots @xmath . This is a set selection problem over the sets @xmath ,
and @xmath , as well as a minimization problem in @xmath . \nomenclature
@xmath Number of transmission time slots \nomenclature @xmath Number of
DTX time slots

##### Complexity

Dynamic subcarrier allocation is known to be a complex problem for a
single time slot in frequency-selective fading channels that can only be
solved by suboptimal or computationally expensive algorithms [ Wong
et al. , 1999 , Kivanc et al. , 2003 , Jang & Lee, 2003 ] . In this
study, two additional degrees of freedom are added by considering AA and
DTX , increasing the complexity further. Consequently the problem is
considered intractable and divided into two steps:

1.  Real-valued estimates of the resource share per user, DTX duration,
    and number of active RF chains @xmath , are derived based on
    simplified system assumptions.

2.  The power-minimizing resource allocation over the integer set @xmath
    and power allocation are performed.

#### 4.5.2 Step 1: Aa, Dtx and Resource Allocation

The first step to solving the global problem is based on a
simplification of the system assumptions. This allows defining a convex
subproblem with an optimal solution, which is later (sub-optimally)
mapped to the solution of the global problem in step 2, described in
Section 4.5.3 .

Instead of time and frequency-selective fading it is assumed that
channel gains on all resources are equal to the center resource block,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the superscript @xmath signifies the center-most subcarrier and
time slot. Step 1 thus assumes a block fading channel per user over
@xmath and @xmath . \nomenclature @xmath Matrix of channel states of the
OFDMA frame’s central resource

The center resource block is selected due to the highest correlation
with all other resources. Alternative methods to construct a
representative channel state matrix are to take the mean or median of
@xmath over the OFDMA frame. However, application of the mean or median
over a set of MIMO channels were found to result in a channel with lower
capacity. See Section 4.5.4 for a comparison plot between different
channel selection methods.

The link capacity is calculated using equal-power precoding and assuming
uncorrelated antennas. In contrast to water-filling precoding,
equal-power precoding provides a direct relationship between total
transmit power and target rate. On block fading channels with
real-valued resource sharing, OFDMA and TDMA are equivalent. Without
loss of generality, resource allocation via TDMA is selected. These
simplifications allow a convex optimization problem to be established
that can be efficiently solved.

In a block fading multi-user downlink with equal power precoding, the
average rate for user @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the vector of channel eigenvalues per user @xmath , and
transmission power on this link, @xmath .

The transmission power is a function of the target rate, depending on
the number of transmit and receive antennas. For the following
configurations, ( 4.17 ) reduces to:

1x2 Single-Input Multiple-Output ( SIMO ),

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

2x2 MIMO ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . These equations can be extended in similar fashion to
combinations with up to four transmit or receive antennas. Note that a
higher number of antennas would require the general algebraic solution
of polynomial equations with degree five or higher, which cannot be
found in line with the Abel-Ruffini theorem [ Rosen, 1995 ] .
\nomenclature @xmath Vector of spatial channel eigenvalues scheduled to
user @xmath

Like on the BS side, the number of RF chains used for reception at the
mobile could be adapted for power saving. However, the power-saving
benefit of receive AA is much smaller than in transmit AA , where a PA
is present in each RF chain. Moreover, multiple receive antennas boost
the useful signal power and provide a diversity gain. Therefore, @xmath
is assumed to be fixed and set to @xmath in the following.

Given the transmission power ( 4.18 ), ( 4.20 ), and the power model (
3.21 ), the supply power consumption for TDMA is derived, similar to (
4.12 ),

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.21)
  -- -- -- --------

Consequently, the optimization problem is defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.22a)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.22b)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.22c)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.22d)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.22e)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The first constraint ensures that all resources are accounted for and
upper bounds @xmath . The second and third constraint guarantee positive
durations. The fourth encompasses the transmit power budget of the BS
and acts as a lower bound on @xmath . Note that due to the block fading
assumption and TDMA , the transmission power per user, @xmath , is
equivalent to @xmath in ( 3.22 ) at that point in time.

This problem is convex in its cost function and constraints (as proven
in Appendix A.2 ). It can therefore be solved with available tools like
the interior point method [ Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004 ] . As part of the
RAPS algorithm, ( 4.22 ) is solved once for each possible number of
transmit antennas. The number of transmit antennas is then selected
according to which solution results in lowest supply power consumption.

The solution of this first step yields an estimate for the supply power
consumption, the number of transmit antennas, @xmath , the DTX time
share, @xmath , and the resource share per user @xmath . If a solution
for step 1 cannot be found, step 2 is not performed and outage occurs.
Outage handling is left to a higher system layer mechanism which could,
e.g. prioritize users and reiterate with reduced system load. If a
solution to step 1 can be found, step 2 is performed as described in the
following section.

#### 4.5.3 Step 2: Subcarrier and Power Allocation

This section describes the second step of the RAPS algorithm. In step 2,
the results of step 1 are mapped back to the global problem to find the
resource allocation for each user, @xmath , the power level per resource
and spatial channel, @xmath , and the number of DTX slots, @xmath .

First, the real-valued resource share, @xmath , is mapped to the OFDMA
resource count per user, @xmath , such that \nomenclature @xmath Number
of resources scheduled to user @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Possible rounding effects through the ceiling operation in ( 4.23 ) are
compensated for by adjusting the number of DTX time slots, with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The remaining time slots are available for transmission,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The remaining unassigned resources,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

are assigned to @xmath in a round-robin fashion. After this allocation,
it holds that @xmath . \nomenclature @xmath Remaining resources during
quantization

Next, the number of assigned resource blocks per user, @xmath , is
equally subdivided into the number of resources per user and time slot,
@xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The remaining unassigned resources per time slot,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

are allocated to different @xmath in a round-robin fashion.
\nomenclature @xmath Number of resources in time slot @xmath scheduled
to user @xmath \nomenclature @xmath Remaining resources in time slot
@xmath during quantization

Time slots considered for DTX are assigned statically, starting from the
back of the frame. Note that the dynamic selection of DTX slots creates
additional opportunities for capacity gains or power savings as they
could be assigned to time slots with poor channel states, e.g. time
slots experiencing deep fades. This opportunity is revisited in Chapter
5 .

A corner case exists when @xmath and ( 4.24 ) becomes negative. This
occurs when the DTX time share, @xmath , is very small and thus traffic
load is high. Due to the high traffic load, it is possible that the
target rates cannot be fulfilled within the transmit power constraint,
leading to outage for at least one user. Accordingly, if @xmath , @xmath
and the resource mapping strategy in ( 4.23 ) is adapted such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which guarantees that @xmath . The remaining resources are allocated to
users as outlined above.

A subcarrier allocation algorithm from Kivanc et al. [ Kivanc et al. ,
2003 ] is adopted, which has been shown to work effectively with low
complexity. The general idea of the algorithm is as follows: First
assign each subcarrier to the user with the best channel. Then start
trading subcarriers from users with too many subcarriers to users with
too few subcarriers based on a nearest-neighbour evaluation of the
channel state. The algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 1 and applied to
each time slot @xmath consecutively. The original algorithm from the
literature is adapted as indicated in the caption.

0: @xmath is the target number of subcarriers allocated to each user
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

1: for all subcarriers @xmath do

2: @xmath

3: @xmath

4: end for

5: for all users @xmath such that @xmath do

6: while @xmath do

7: @xmath

8: @xmath

9: @xmath

10: end while

11: end for

Algorithm 1 Adapted RCG algorithm performed on each time slot @xmath .
As compared to [ Kivanc et al. , 2003 ] the cost parameter @xmath has
been adapted and the absolute value has been added to the search of the
nearest neighbour. @xmath holds the set of subcarriers assigned to user
@xmath .

\nomenclature

@xmath Set of subcarriers on time slot @xmath assigned to user @xmath

At this stage, the MIMO configuration, the number of DTX time slots, and
the subcarrier assignment are determined. Transmit powers are assigned
in both spatial and time-frequency domains via an algorithm termed
margin-adaptive power allocation [ Yu et al. , 2002 ] . The notion of
this algorithm is as follows: First, channels are sorted by quality and
a ‘water-level’ is initialized on the best channel, such that the rate
target is fulfilled. Then, in each iteration of the algorithm, the next
best channel is added to the set of used channels, thus reducing the
water-level in each step. The search is finished once the water-level is
lower than the next channel metric to be added. Refer to Appendix A.3
for the derivation.

Let the number of bits to be transmitted to each user be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

To fulfill @xmath , the following constraint must be met

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

which assesses the sum capacity according to ( 4.13 ). \nomenclature
@xmath Target rate for user @xmath in bps

The water-level @xmath can be found via an iterative search over the set
of channels that contribute a positive power, @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The water-level is largest on the first iteration and decreases on each
iteration until it can no longer be decreased. \nomenclature @xmath Set
of channels which contribute positive power in margin adaptive power
allocation \nomenclature @xmath Water-level in margin-adaptive power
allocation

Using the Lagrangian method detailed in Appendix A.3 , one arrives at a
power-level per spatial channel of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The margin-adaptive algorithm is illustrated for four channels in Fig.
4.7 . The outcome of margin-adaptive power allocation as part of RAPS
are the transmission power levels @xmath for each resource block. The
supply power consumption after application of RAPS can be found by
summation of transmission powers in each time slot and application of
the affine power model. The entire RAPS algorithm is outlined in Fig.
4.8 .

#### 4.5.4 Results

In order to assess the performance of the RAPS algorithm Monte Carlo
simulations are conducted. The simulations are configured as follows:
mobiles are uniformly distributed around the BS on a circle with radius
250 m and a minimum distance of 40 m to the BS to avoid peak SNRs .
Fading is computed according to the NLOS model described in 3GPP TR
25.814 [ 3GPP, 2010a ] with 8 dB shadowing standard deviation, and the
frequency-selective channel model B5 described in [
IST-2003-507581 WINNER, 2005 ] with 3 m/s mobile velocity. All transmit
and receive antennas are assumed to be mutually uncorrelated. Further
system parameters are listed in Table 4.3 .

##### Benchmarks

The following transmission strategies are evaluated for comparison
purposes:

-   The theoretical limit of the BS power consumption is obtained by
    constant transmission at maximum power, @xmath .

-    BA , which finds the minimum number of subcarriers that achieves
    the rate target. No sleep modes are utilized and all scheduled
    subcarriers transmit with a transmission power spectral density of
    @xmath . This benchmark represents the power consumption of SotA BSs
    which are neither capable of DTX nor AA .

-    DTX , where the BS transmits with full power, @xmath , and switches
    to DTX once the rate requirements are fulfilled. This benchmark
    assesses the attainable savings when only DTX is applied.

##### Performance Analysis

The channel value selection in ( 4.16 ) serves as the channel gain for
the block fading assumption of step 1. How the channel value selection
of three possible alternatives (mean, median center) affects the supply
power consumption is examined in Fig. 4.9 . It can be seen that the
selection of the mean channel gain results in the highest supply power
consumption estimate after step 1. While the estimate can be improved in
step 2, it is still inferior to the other alternatives. Use of the mean
channel states causes step 1 to underestimate the channel quality.
Consequently, too few time slots are selected for DTX in step 2.
Choosing the median provides a better estimate than the mean and after
step 2 the solution matches ‘step 2, center selection’. However, in
center channel state selection the step 1 estimate and the step 2
solution have both the best match and the lowest supply power
consumption. Therefore, as mentioned in Section 4.5.2 , center channel
state selection is chosen in the RAPS algorithm and all further
analyses.

Fig. 4.10 compares the outage probabilities of step 1 with that of the
BA benchmark. Outage refers to the lack of a solution to step 1; when
the user target data rates are too high for the given channel
conditions, the convex subproblem has no solution, which causes the
algorithm to fail. A reduction of user target data rates based on, e.g.
priorities, latency or fairness, is specifically not covered by RAPS .
One suggested alternative is to introduce admission control, in the way
that some users are denied access, so that the remaining users achieve
their target rates. Note that step 2 has no effect on the outage; if a
solution exists after step 1, then step 2 can be completed. If a
solution does not exist after step 1, then step 2 is not performed. Fig.
4.10 illustrates that RAPS selects two transmit antennas for target link
rates above 14 Mbps with high probability, as target link rates cannot
be achieved with a single transmit antenna. The BA benchmark and the
step 1 MIMO solution have similar outage behavior.

Fig. 4.11 depicts the average number of DTX time slots over increasing
target link rates. The effect of AA ( i.e. switching between SIMO and
MIMO transmission) can clearly be seen. For low target link rates, a
large proportion of all time slots is selected for DTX . For higher
target link rates, the number of DTX time slots must be reduced when
operating in SIMO mode. For target link rates above 12 Mbps, which
approach the SIMO capacity (as described in the previous paragraph), the
system switches to MIMO transmission. The added MIMO capacity allows the
RAPS scheduler to allocate more time slots to DTX . In the medium load
region (around 15 Mbps) the standard deviation is highest, indicating
that here the RAPS algorithm strongly varies the number of DTX time
slots depending on channel conditions and whether SIMO or MIMO
transmission is selected. These variations contribute strongly to the
additional savings provided by RAPS over the benchmarks. Another
observation from Fig. 4.11 is that it is unlikely that more than two out
of ten DTX time slots are scheduled at target link rates above 8 Mbps.
This means that for a large range of target rates, no more than two DTX
time slots are required to minimize power consumption. This is an
important finding for applications of RAPS in established systems like
LTE , where the number of DTX time slots may be limited due to
constraints imposed by the standard.

A comparison of the supply power consumption estimates of step 1 and
step 2 in Fig. 4.12 verifies that the estimate taken in step 1 as input
for step 2 are sufficiently accurate. Although step 1 is greatly
simplified with the assumption of block fading and its output parameters
cannot be applied readily to an OFDMA system, it precisely estimates
power consumption which is the optimization cost function. The slight
difference between the step 1 estimate and power consumption after
step 2 is caused by quantization loss and resource scheduling. Note that
while step 1 supplies a good estimate of the power consumption, it is
not a solution to the original OFDMA scheduling problem, since it does
not consider the frequency-selectivity of the channel and does not yield
the resource and power allocation.

The performance of RAPS in comparison to each benchmark is separately
analyzed in Fig. 4.13 . Here, a first observation is that even the
supply power consumption of BA is significantly lower than the
theoretical maximum for most target link rates. BA with a single
transmit antenna always consumes less power than with two antennas, as
long as the rate targets with one antenna can be met. AA is thus a valid
power-saving mechanism for BA .

Second, the DTX power consumption is significantly lower than for BA ,
especially at low target rates, because lower target rates allow the BS
to enter DTX for longer periods of time. As the BS load increases, the
opportunities of the DTX benchmark to enter sleep mode are reduced, so
that DTX power consumption approaches that of BA . Unlike in BA , it is
never beneficial for a BS capable of DTX to switch operation to a single
antenna, because transmitting for a longer time with a single antenna
always consumes more power than a short two-antenna transmission, which
allows for a longer DTX duration. (Note that this finding may not apply
to other power models.)

Third, RAPS reduces power consumption further than DTX by employing AA
at low rates and PC at high rates. Through PC , the slope of the supply
power is kept low between 15 and 20 Mbps. At higher rates an upward
trend becomes apparent, since link rates only grow logarithmically with
the transmission power. In theory, when the BS is at full load, the
supply power of all energy saving mechanism will approach maximum power
consumption. However, when the BS load is very high, not all users may
achieve their target rate and outage occurs (see Fig. 4.10 ). In other
words, operating the BS with load margins controls outage and allows for
large transmission power savings. Power savings of RAPS compared to the
SotA BA range from 102.7 W (24.5%) to 136.9 W (41.4%) depending on the
target link rate per user.

In addition to absolute consumption, the energy efficiency of RAPS is
inspected in Fig. 4.14 . Energy efficiency is defined in bit/Joule as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe that all data series are monotonically increasing. Therefore,
RAPS does not change the paradigm that a BS is most efficiently operated
at peak rates. However, RAPS will always offer the most efficient
operation at any requested rate. \nomenclature @xmath Energy efficiency
in bit/Joule

### 4.6 Summary

Starting with the Shannon limit, this chapter derived supply power
optimal resource allocation in an LTE cell.

First, a literature review described the SotA of energy efficient RRM
for cellular networks.

Next, the general interrelationships between bandwidth, power and time
in transmissions were studied. As the PA consumption can be reduced by
PC , a multi-user downlink PC allocation mechanism was proposed.
Consideration of single links was found to be insufficient for
power-saving, as a BS schedules multiple users on the same resources. It
was shown that the power model, due to its affine mapping, does not
affect the PC solution. Thus, it is also the solution to supply power
minimization, when sleep modes are not considered.

As the power consumption reduction through PC is lower bounded by the
idle power consumption of a transmitter, short sleep modes, i.e. DTX ,
have also been taken into consideration. It was shown that the joint
application of PC and DTX brings additional savings over the application
of each individual scheme. Using convex optimization, a resource
allocation mechanism called PRAIS was proposed. Using PRAIS ,
fundamental limits of power-saving resource allocation were identified
on several power models. Power savings estimated on the basis of the
affine model presented in Chapter 3 are in the range of 50%.

When adding the integer value constraint, which is present in practical
systems where resources are only available in chunks and each has an
individual channel state, the resource allocation problem becomes a
mixed integer program. As this problem is highly complex, it was split
into two steps. A convex subproblem was derived and solved in similar
fashion as in the PRAIS algorithm. The solution to the subproblem yields
an approximation of quantization, providing a configuration for the
mixed integer problem. The overall algorithm is labelled RAPS .
Application of the RAPS algorithm on this stricter constraint set
achieved savings in the order of 25% to 40%.

The RAPS algorithm could be readily applied in current LTE systems. It
adds complexity to scheduling, but offers significant power savings over
all loads. Limitations lie in the fact that switching is not
instantaneous in practice and PAs have limits on the PC range. If
switching times are slower than the fraction of a time slot, power
savings will not be as high as predicted. Due to linearity requirements,
some PAs have a lower limit on transmission powers. Thus, PC may not be
as effective as predicted in this chapter. Overall, these limitations
only affect the achievable savings, not the functionality of the
power-saving RRM algorithms presented in the chapter.

## Chapter 5 Power Saving on the Network Level (Multi-cell)

### 5.1 Overview

Chapter 4 proposed how the power consumption of a BS could be minimized
regardless of interference. This chapter expands the power-saving
perspective to the network level, thus taking inter-cell interference
into account. In particular, it studies how the DTX time slots scheduled
by each BS in a network can be aligned constructively to avoid mutual
interference. See Fig. 5.1 for an illustration of multiple cells, each
choosing to transmit or schedule DTX in the available time slots.

In this chapter, the findings on channel allocation from literature are
combined and adapted for power-saving. Four DTX alignment strategies for
the cellular downlink are derived, one of which is an original
contribution in which each BS independently and without coordination
prioritizes time slots for transmission while maintaining system
stability.

The remainder of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 5.3
formulates the system model and the problem at hand. In Section 5.4 ,
three SotA channel alignment solutions are described and the novel
alignment method is introduced. Findings obtained from simulation are
presented in Section 5.5 . The chapter is summarized in Section 5.6 .

The contents of this chapter have been previously accepted for
publication in [ Holtkamp & Haas, 2013 ] and submitted for publication
in [ Holtkamp et al. , 2013 ] .

### 5.2 Channel Allocation in Literature

Generally, in channel allocation, the challenge is to assign frequency
channels to different cells or links of a network such that mutual
interference is avoided. Several centralized approaches to interference
avoidance have been proposed [ Li & Liu, 2006 , Uygungelen et al. , 2011
, Rahman & Yanikomeroglu, 2010 , Liang et al. , 2012 ] . However, to be
applicable for future small-cell cellular networks, such channel
allocation needs to be distributed, uncoordinated and dynamic.
Distributed operation prevents the delay and backhaul requirements
imposed by a central controller. If the allocation is also
uncoordinated, it does not require message exchange through a backhaul
of limited capacity. Furthermore, as networks, channels and traffic
change rapidly, the allocation must be highly dynamic and updated often.
Problems of this type are known to be NP-hard [ Katzela & Naghshineh,
1996 ] . Therefore, different suboptimal approaches have been proposed.
The simplest approach to distributing channels over a network is a fixed
assignment in which it is predefined which links will use which
channels, e.g. see [ Proakis, 2000 ] . However, this is inflexible to
changing or asymmetric traffic loads. For flexibility, dynamic channel
allocation methods are required. A simple dynamic channel allocation
method, Sequential Channel Search [ Serizawa & Goodman, 1993 ] , assigns
channels with sufficient quality in a predefined order. This technique
allows adjusting the number of channels flexibly, but is suboptimal due
to its strong channel overlap between neighbors. Taking the channel
quality into consideration by measurement is proposed in the Minimum
SINR method [ Serizawa & Goodman, 1993 ] . This technique offers
increased spectral efficiency, but can lead to instabilities when
allocations happen synchronously. Ellenbeck et al. [ Ellenbeck et al. ,
2008 ] introduce methods of game theory and respond to the instabilities
by adding p-persistence to avoid simultaneous bad player decisions.
However, the proposed method only applies to single user systems and
does not address target rates. Dynamic Channel Segregation [ Akaiwa &
Andoh, 1993 ] introduces the notion of memory of channel availability,
allowing a transmitter to track which channels tend to be favorable for
transmission. However, the algorithm only applies to sequential channel
decisions based on an idle or busy state in circuit switched networks
and cannot be applied to the concurrent alignment of channels as is
required in OFDMA networks.

### 5.3 System Model and Problem Formulation

The network is considered as follows. BSs in a reuse-one OFDMA cellular
network schedule a target rate, @xmath , per OFDMA frame to be
transmitted to each mobile @xmath . All time slots are available for
scheduling in all cells. Mobiles report perceived SINR from the previous
OFDMA frame, @xmath , on subcarrier @xmath , time slot @xmath to their
associated BS . BSs have a DTX mode available for each time slot during
which transmission and reception are disabled and power consumption is
significantly reduced to @xmath compared to power consumption during
transmission, which is a function of the power allocated to each
resource block, @xmath . DTX is available fast enough to enable it
within individual time slots of an OFDMA transmission such that
transmission time slots are not required to be consecutive. A BS can
schedule no transmission in one or more time slots and go to DTX mode
instead. Scheduling a DTX time slot in one BS reduces the interference
on that time slot to all other BSs . The OFDMA frames of all BSs are
assumed to be aligned such that the interference over one time slot and
subcarrier is flat and that all BSs can perform alignment operations in
synchrony. The OFDMA frame consists of @xmath resource blocks. The
channel is subject to block fading as described in Section 2.5.2 .
Interference is treated as noise.

To describe the resource allocation problem formally, the function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.1)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

is defined, which maps to each resource block a user @xmath or 0, where
0 indicates that the resource block is not scheduled. \nomenclature
@xmath Function mapping resource blocks to users

With @xmath the capacity of resource @xmath if it is scheduled to @xmath
, the optimization problem for the total BS power consumption, @xmath ,
is as follows.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2b)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2c)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2d)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With @xmath the cardinality operator, @xmath is the number of time slots
in which for all @xmath , no user is allocated and the BS can enable DTX
and @xmath is the number of resource blocks that are scheduled for
transmission. The constraint ( 5.2d ) provides the rate guarantee for
each user. \nomenclature @xmath Capacity of subcarrier @xmath , time
slot @xmath when scheduled to user @xmath \nomenclature @xmath Number of
time slots in which for all subcarriers no user is allocated
\nomenclature @xmath Number of resource blocks scheduled for
transmission

The difficulty lies in finding the mapping @xmath . Under a brute force
approach, there exist @xmath possible combinations. Due to the large
number resource blocks present in typical OFDMA systems like LTE , the
computation of the solution is infeasible. Consequently, the next
section resorts to heuristic methods.

Some of the methods compared in the following make use of a time slot
ranking. In other works, e.g. [ Akaiwa & Andoh, 1993 ] , ranking is
proposed to be based on SINR . However, in a multi-user OFDMA system
each subcarrier and mobile terminal have a different SINR , thus
generating a problem of comparability between time slots. Consequently,
it is proposed to compare time slots by their hypothetical sum capacity,
@xmath , over all mobiles and subcarriers with

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath Virtual sum capacity of time slot @xmath in bits

### 5.4 Dtx Alignment Strategies

In this section, four strategies to tackle the problem at hand are
identified which differ in performance and complexity.

#### 5.4.1 Sequential Alignment

In sequential alignment , the strategy is to always allocate as many
time slots for transmission as required in sequential order as
illustrated in Fig. 5.2 and set the remainder to DTX . This leads to
strongest overlap and consequently highest interference on the first
time slot and lowest overlap and possibly no transmissions at all on the
last time slot. This strategy does not make use of the available channel
quality information per subcarrier and provides valuable insights into
questions of stability, reliability and convergence.

#### 5.4.2 Random Alignment

Random alignment refers to a random selection of transmission time slots
after every OFDMA frame and setting the remainder to DTX . This results
in chaotic interference patterns. This strategy provides a reference for
achievable gains, allows to assess the worst cast effects of randomness
and represents the SotA in today’s unsynchronized, unaligned networks.

#### 5.4.3 P-persistent Ranking

The synchronous alignment of uncoordinated BSs can lead to
instabilities, when neighboring BSs –perceiving similar interference
information–schedule the same time slots for transmission. This leads to
oscillating scheduling which never reaches the desired system state [
Ellenbeck et al. , 2008 ] . To address this problem, p-persistence is
introduced to break the unwanted synchrony by only changing established
DTX schedules with a probability @xmath . In initial tests, the value of
@xmath did not have a significant effect on the power consumption; exact
tuning is presented in [ Ellenbeck et al. , 2008 ] . P-persistent
ranking first ranks time slots by their sum capacity as in ( 5.3 ),
schedules time slots in that order, but only applies this new selection
with probability @xmath . Otherwise, the schedule from the last
iteration remains active. After ranking, time slots are selected for
transmission in order of @xmath . The remainder of time slots is set to
DTX .

#### 5.4.4 Distributed Dtx Alignment with Memory

To counter oscillation and achieve a convergent network state memory of
past schedules is introduced into the alignment process. The notion of
the distributed DTX alignment with memory algorithm is as follows.
Taking into account current time slot capacities, @xmath , past scores
and slot allocations, each BS first updates the internal score of each
time slot and then returns the priority of time slots by score. In case
of equal scores, time slots are further sub-sorted by @xmath . The score
is updated in integers. All time slots which were used for transmission
in the previous OFDMA frame receive a score increment of one.
Furthermore, the time slot with highest @xmath , @xmath , receives an
increment of one. Time slots which were not used for transmission in the
previous OFDMA frame receive a decrement of one, except for @xmath .
Scores have an upper limit, @xmath , beyond which there is no increment
and a lower limit, @xmath , below which there is no decrement. The
difference between @xmath and @xmath can be interpreted as the depth of
the memory buffer.

0: @xmath

1: @xmath sort-desc-by-capacity @xmath

2: for all @xmath in @xmath do

3: if @xmath then

4: @xmath

5: end if

6: end for

7: for all @xmath in @xmath do

8: if @xmath then

9: @xmath

10: end if

11: end for

12: @xmath

13: @xmath sort-desc-by-score @xmath

14: return @xmath

Algorithm 2 Distributed DTX alignment with memory

\nomenclature

@xmath Scoring map, assigning scores to users \nomenclature @xmath Set
of used/unused time slots, respectively \nomenclature @xmath Ranking
tuple, time slots in order of capacity \nomenclature @xmath Upper/lower
limit of score, respectively \nomenclature @xmath Time slot with highest
virtual capacity \nomenclature @xmath Priority tuple, time slots in
order of score

The algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2 with scoring map @xmath , ranking
tuple @xmath , and priority tuple @xmath . The set of used time slots,
@xmath , and unused time slots, @xmath , make up the set of time slots,
@xmath , the cardinality of which is @xmath . The function
‘sort-desc-by-capacity( @xmath )’ returns a list of time slots ordered
descending by @xmath . The function ‘sort-desc-by-score @xmath ’ returns
a list of time slots ordered primarily by descending score and
secondarily by descending @xmath . After the execution of Algorithm 2 ,
the first @xmath time slots in @xmath are scheduled for transmission.

In the following, the iterations over three OFDMA frames of Algorithm 2
for a system with three time slots are illustrated. In the example, the
algorithm delays the change of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath to buffer
scheduling changes. The iteration begins with arbitrarily chosen @xmath
, @xmath :

1.  @xmath , @xmath
    @xmath , @xmath

2.  @xmath , @xmath
    @xmath , @xmath

3.  @xmath , @xmath
    @xmath , @xmath

When applied, Algorithm 2 strongly benefits time slots which were used
for transmission in the past ( @xmath in step 1 of the example). These
time slots tend to repeatedly receive score increments until they all
have maximum score @xmath ( @xmath in step 2 of the example). When the
score is equal for some time slots ( @xmath in step 2 of the example),
the ranking is based on @xmath . A time slot which was used for
transmission and has highest @xmath , @xmath , receives the highest
increment (slot @xmath in step 2 of the example). When a time slot has
highest @xmath , but was not selected for transmission in the previous
OFDMA frame, it receives a score increment, but is not guaranteed to be
used for transmission (slot @xmath in step 1 of the example). When a
time slot repeatedly has highest @xmath , it reaches @xmath ( @xmath in
the example). The algorithm thus buffers short term changes in the
channel quality setting in favor of long term time slot selection.

### 5.5 Results

This section analyzes the four alignment strategies in simulation with
regard to power consumption, convergence, reliability of delivered rates
and algorithmic complexity after the introduction of the simulation
environment and the resource block scheduling scheme.

##### Simulation Environment and Resource Block Scheduling

The four strategies were tested in a network simulation with 19-cell
hexagonal arrangement with uniformly distributed mobiles and fixed
target rates per mobile. Data was collected only from the center cell
which is thus surrounded by two tiers of interfering cells. Power
consumption of a cell is modelled by the affine model in ( 3.23 ). Table
5.1 lists additional parameters used which approximate an LTE system.
The simulation is started with the assumption of full transmission power
on all resources with a power consumption of 355 W per cell as a
worst-case initial configuration.

In order to assess the performance of the four strategies, it is
necessary to make assumptions about how the individual resource blocks
are scheduled within a time slot. Resource block scheduling is itself
challenging and can have a strong effect on power consumption. In order
to avoid masking effects of the time slot scheduling algorithms under
test, only a very simple sequential resource block allocation is applied
rather than sophisticated solutions from the literature. Sequential
resource allocation is performed after the DTX alignment step is
completed and allocates as many bits to an OFDMA resource as possible
according to the Shannon capacity, followed in order by the next
resource in the same time slot (sequentially), until the target rate has
been scheduled to each mobile. Time slots are scheduled in the order
provided by each of the four strategies. This sequential resource
scheduler deliberately omits the benefits of multi-user diversity. This
leads to underestimating achievable rates in simulation compared to a
system which exploits multi-user diversity, in favor of allowing a fair
comparison of the quality of different DTX alignment algorithms.

##### Power Consumption

To assess achievable power savings and the dynamic adaptivity over a
large range of cell loads, the cell total power consumption is shown in
Fig. 5.3 . At low load very few resource blocks are required to deliver
the target rate and more time slots can be scheduled for DTX than at
high traffic loads, leading to monotonously rising power consumption
over increasing target rates for all alignment methods.

Sequential alignment causes the highest power consumption over any
target rate with an almost linear relationship between user target rates
and power consumption. Sequential alignment consumes high power, as it
schedules many resource blocks to achieve the target rate due to the
high interference level present.

This power consumption is significantly lower for the SotA , random
alignment. The randomness of time slot alignment creates a much lower
average interference than with sequential alignment allowing more data
to be transmitted in each resource block. As fewer resource blocks are
required, less power is consumed.

P-persistent ranking and DTX with memory both achieve similarly low
power consumption of up to 40% less than random alignment. The
relationship between power consumption and target rate is noticeably
non-linear, as it is flat at low target rates and grows more steeply at
high target rates. This behavior is caused by the low interference level
these strategies manage to create. Only at high rates, when the number
of sleep time slots has to be significantly decreased, does the
interference increase, leading to higher power consumption.

Also noteworthy is the fact that at 1 Mbps and 3 Mbps, random alignment
performs nearly as good as p-persistent ranking. At these extreme points
the network is almost unloaded and almost fully loaded, respectively.
Consequently, either most time slots are scheduled for DTX or none,
leaving very little room for optimization compared to randomness. The
largest potential for time slot alignment for power saving is in
networks which are medium loaded. Under medium load, the number of
transmission and DTX time slots is similar, causing the effects of
alignment to be most pronounced.

##### Convergence

Another relevant aspect is the convergence of the network to a stable
state. As each BS makes iterative adjustments to its selection of time
slots for transmission, the speed of convergence as well as the
convergence to a stable point of operation are relevant criteria. The
effect of the iterative execution of the four strategies on the cell
power consumption is illustrated in Fig. 5.4 . Power consumption is
found to converge to a stable value within within six OFDMA frames
(alignment iterations). All strategies converge to the average power
consumption values shown in Fig. 5.3 . The simulation starts from a
worst-case schedule of transmission on all resource blocks and then
iteratively schedules time slots for transmission and DTX . In the case
of 1 Mbps per user, one transmission time slot is sufficient to schedule
the target rate. With transmissions only taking place during one time
slot, there is very little difference between a random alignment and
p-persistent ranking or DTX with memory.

At 2 Mbps per user, see Fig. 5.5 , random alignment occasionally causes
higher interference than p-persistent ranking or DTX with memory,
leading to higher power consumption. Also, p-persistent ranking
converges more slowly than DTX alignment with memory.

##### Reliability

An important aspect in dynamical systems with target rates is that
scheduled target rates cannot always be fulfilled. As resource block
scheduling is based on channel quality information which was collected
in the previous OFDMA frame, the actual channel quality during
transmission may differ, leading to lower than expected rates. Thus,
although certain target rates are scheduled and although the system is
not fully loaded, a BS may fail to deliver the targeted rate and require
retransmission of some resource blocks. This metric is assessed by
considering the retransmission probability for each strategy. The
results are shown in Fig. 5.6 against a range of user target rates.

Easiest to interpret is sequential alignment which does not require
retransmission for target rates up to 2.3 Mbps due to its determinism.
The increase in the retransmission probability at high rates is not
caused by a failure of the alignment, but by system overload. When high
rates are combined with bad channel conditions, the system may be unable
to deliver the target data rate, independent of the alignment strategy.
This increase of the retransmission probability at high rates is present
for all alignment strategies and constitutes outage.

The retransmission probability is highest for random alignment. This is
caused by the strong fluctuation of interference under randomized
scheduling. Channel quality measurements used for resource block
scheduling are of very little reliability, as the interference changes
quickly due to random time slot alignment.

P-persistent ranking performs slightly better than random alignment at
1 Mbps target rate. At 2 Mbps per user, where the alignment potential is
highest, oscillation causes the highest retransmission probability.

DTX alignment with memory achieves a much lower retransmission
probability in the range of 15% to 20%, due to the reduction in
interference fluctuation introduced by the memory score.

##### Complexity

With regard to complexity, sequential and random alignment are of
minimal complexity. These strategies involve no algorithmic
decision-making on the set of transmission time slots. P-persistent
ranking requires one ranking and time slot selection with probability
@xmath per iteration. The highest complexity is present in DTX with
memory, which requires two executions of the time slot sort, one for the
generation of the score and one for the output of the ranking. Although
DTX with memory comprises the highest complexity in comparison, these
operations pose a small burden on modern hardware as the number of time
slots is typically small. For example, typical LTE systems are designed
with 10 subframes (time slots).

##### Interpretation

DTX with memory was found to provide the best results. Under the present
assumptions, it provides both a lower power consumption and lower
retransmission probability than the SotA and p-persistent ranking.
Future DTX capable networks can and should exploit this alignment
potential.

### 5.6 Summary

In this chapter, the constructive uncoordinated and distributed
alignment of DTX time slots between interfering OFDMA BSs for
power-saving under rate constraints was studied. The open problem was
first formally established. Due to its complexity, it was approached
with four alternative heuristic strategies: Sequential alignment, random
alignment, p-persistent ranking and distributed DTX with memory.
Distributed DTX with memory is an original contribution of this thesis.
It addresses shortcomings of the other strategies by introducing memory
to overcome short-term fluctuations and networks oscillations. The
performance of the four strategies was tested in simulation. It was
found that power consumption can be reduced significantly, especially at
medium cell loads. All strategies converge within six OFDMA frames. DTX
with memory reduces power consumption up to 40% compared to the SotA ,
combined with around 20% reduction in retransmission probability.

## Chapter 6 Conclusions, Limitations and Future Work

### 6.1 Summary and Conclusions

In this thesis, the power consumption of LTE BS devices was studied and
modelled. The findings from the model were applied to reduce power
consumption through energy efficient RRM mechanisms while upholding user
rate constraints. RRM mechanisms were applied to control links on the
cell level and interference on the multi-cell level.

In Chapter 1 , the importance of energy efficiency for current mobile
networks was emphasized. As mobile traffic, the number of devices and
the size of the infrastructure are constantly increasing, the @xmath
emission of mobile networks is expected to double between 2007 and 2020.
Green Radio research efforts, such as this thesis, are directed to
revert that trend.

Chapter 2 first inspected the power consumption life cycle of a mobile
network. While the production of mobile equipment causes significant
emissions of @xmath , the operation is power efficient. The situation
was found to be almost the opposite for cellular BSs which cause the
largest share of emissions during operation. This is caused by the
significant number of stations in operation combined with their long
life times. This situation motivated the reduction of operation power
consumption of BSs as the topic of this thesis. Next, the SotA of Green
Radio was identified through a detailed literature survey. Finally, the
chapter also discussed fundamental technical concepts in preparation for
the original contributions in Chapters 3 , 4 , and 5 .

Chapter 3 explored the sources of power consumption in an LTE BS .
First, the difficulty of accurate power modeling and other existing
power models were described. Next, the typical architecture of a BS was
introduced. Each of its components was discussed and individually
modelled. Components were found to be either load adaptive, like the PA
and BB unit, have constant power consumption, like the RF transceiver,
or have a power consumption which scales with other components’
consumption, like power conversion and cooling. The power consumptions
of the subcomponents were combined to find the power consumption of the
entire BS . Since the component model is too elaborate for many
applications, a parameterized model was proposed which abstracts many
parameters. The parameterized model only considers those parameters
which are typically modified during operation such as bandwidth,
transmission power, the number of transmission antennas, and sleep mode.
Parameters were provided. The parameterized model was once more
simplified into an affine model which can be applied in optimization.
Overall, it was found that an increase of the energy efficiency in BSs
must be based on reducing the PA power consumption through PC and
setting the entire BS to a sleep mode. Hardware research should focus on
enabling and amplifying these two mechanisms. Other manipulation such as
the adaptation of coding, modulation or bandwidth are less promising.
Simple models are found to capture the most relevant aspects
sufficiently.

With the power model and saving techniques identified in the prior
chapter, Chapter 4 explored three RRM mechanisms to reduce BS power
consumption. The first technique is PC , through which power was adapted
to match only the requested capacity per UE instead of over-achieving.
The second technique is DTX , a very short sleep mode. Of the two, PC
was found to provide strong savings in high load when transmission power
is generally high, whereas DTX was most effective at low load when there
is ample opportunity for sleep mode. It was shown that the joint
application of PC and DTX achieves lower power consumption than either
individual technique over all cell traffic loads in the PRAIS scheme.
This joint problem was shown to be convex and thus efficiently solvable.
This finding was combined with the third technique, AA , and applied by
using it as the core of a power-saving MIMO OFDMA resource scheduler,
called RAPS . RAPS first solves a simplified convex real-valued
subproblem. The solution of the subproblem is then quantized to the
integer-valued OFDMA scheduling problem and joined with subcarrier
allocation and power allocation. AA was found to provide little added
value on top of the other two techniques. Application of RAPS was shown
to reduce power consumption of LTE BSs by 25-40% in single-cell
simulation. RAPS could be readily built into current LTE BSs .

Going beyond the cell level, Chapter 5 studied the exploration of
intercell interference for power saving. It is beneficial to align the
DTX mode of BSs constructively, to the effect that interference is
reduced. Four alternative alignment techniques have been tested in
simulation: sequential alignment, random alignment, p-persistent
ranking, and distributed DTX with memory. The latter is an original
contribution by the author. Sequential alignment is a conservative
technique which maximizes interference for the benefit of
predictability. Random alignment is assumed was the SotA . P-persistent
ranking is a popular technique for the suppression of oscillation.
Distributed DTX with memory goes further and keeps track of past
allocations and channel quality to enable convergence to a stable
network state. The important finding was that—unlike for the single cell
in Chapter 4 —the power consumption could not be reduced through these
mechanisms without affecting the QoS . The interference dynamics cause
occasional violations of the rate constraints, thus necessitating
retransmissions. Random alignment caused regular rate constraint
violations at medium power consumption. P-persistent ranking was
slightly more reliable with lower retransmission probability at low
power consumption. However, distributed DTX with memory provided a much
lower retransmission probability than p-persistent ranking at lower
power consumption. It thus provided the best best retransmission
probability and power saving. The power saving of distributed DTX with
memory over the SotA was found to be up to 40%, depending on the cell
loads.

In conclusion, this thesis provides three readily applicable supply
power models for LTE BSs , including the model derivations. From these
models, DTX and PC were identified as most effective and applied to
reduce BS operating power consumption. PC and DTX were optimized jointly
and integrated into a comprehensive MIMO OFDMA scheduler. The inherent
DTX time slots of such a scheduler were then aligned constructively
between neighbouring BSs . Reducing BS power consumption by 50% through
software is thus well within reach.

### 6.2 Limitations and Future Work

The most important limitation to the techniques proposed in this thesis
lies in the restrictions imposed on the scheduler by a transmission
standard like LTE . In this research, it was assumed that a scheduler
can select any resource block for transmission or sleep. In practice,
however, this selection will be limited as the standard reserves some
resources for signaling, channel sounding, or pilot transmission. Since
the scheduler will be less potent due to this limited selection, power
consumption is expected to be higher under these constraints.

Next, the power model in Chapter 3 as well as all later chapters assume
that a BS can be switched on and off in an instant. Yet, although
switching times are assumed to be in the order of tens of microseconds [
Frenger et al. , 2011 ] , they are not fully instantaneous. This has to
be considered in DTX and wake–up scheduling. If sleep modes are deeper,
switching times will become longer. Following this line of argument,
there may actually be more than one sleep mode available; for example,
an OFF state with zero power consumption, a deep sleep with very low
consumption, and a light sleep for DTX . In that case, a scheduler would
have to consider the wake–up times in its selection of sleep modes.

Finally, the validity of the results presented over the coming years is
strongly dependent on the assumptions made in the power model. Drastic
changes in the architecture of BS , for example through the
proliferation of massive MIMO [ Larsson et al. , 2013 ] , may change the
way BSs consume power. In such a case, the effectiveness of different
saving techniques will have to be re-evaluated.

For future research, the most immediate goal is to combine the RAPS
scheduler with distributed DTX with memory and assess the joint power
savings. As the RAPS scheduler makes no assumptions about the time slots
allocated for DTX , it can provide instructions for the DTX alignment
scheme. A further planned extension to the DTX alignment scheme is an
decrease of the retransmission probability. It is expected that a rate
margin imposed on the rate constraint, i.e. requesting a higher rate
target, will be beneficial.

Another important addition is the consideration of standards
limitations. The strength of the impact of standards limitations has to
be assessed. If the standard in its current form severely caps power
savings, future standards could be designed to be more open to power
saving.

The power-saving RRM mechanisms established herein can also be applied
to BSs which are smaller than macro. In smaller BS types, the load
dependence is smaller. Thus, PC is less effective compared to DTX .
Consideration of smaller BS types is also related to the field of
HetNets [ Hu et al. , 2011 ] . Since coverage is generally assumed to
overlap in HetNets, new options for longer sleep modes arise as UEs will
have guaranteed coverage even when some BSs are asleep.

All analyses in this work assumed a uniform distribution of BSs .
However, with the advance of HetNets, it may also be relevant to explore
distributions such as Poisson Point Processes [ Haenggi et al. , 2009 ]
. This will have an effect particularly on the multi-cell DTX alignment
work.

## Appendix A Appendix

### a.1 Proof of Convexity for Problem (4.12)

This proof shows that ( 4.12 ) is convex.

###### Proof.

For @xmath , the first derivative of the cost function for link @xmath
is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The second derivative of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

All variables in the second derivative are positive, thus @xmath within
the parameter bounds. Therefore, each @xmath is convex within the
bounds.

The non-negative sum preserves convexity. Thus, @xmath is convex. ∎

### a.2 Proof of Convexity for Problem (4.15)

This proof shows that ( 4.15 ) is convex.

###### Proof.

The partial second derivative of the MIMO cost function in ( 4.15 ) with
respect to @xmath is

  -- -- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath            (A.3)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------

which is non-negative since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

within the parameter bounds. Thus the cost function is convex in @xmath
within the bounds. ∎

Convexity of the SIMO cost function and the constraint function can be
shown similarly and is omitted here for brevity.

### a.3 Margin-adaptive Resource Allocation

Margin-adaptive power allocation over a set of resource blocks, @xmath ,
and a vector of channel eigenvalues, @xmath , minimizes power
consumption while fulfilling a target rate [ Yu et al. , 2002 ] .

Assuming block-diagonalization precoding, the problem is to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath               (A.5a)
              @xmath               (A.5b)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.5c)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.5d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With Lagrange multipliers @xmath , the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker optimality
conditions for ( A.5 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6e)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6f)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6g)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where ( A.6a ), ( A.6b ), ( A.6c ) ensure the primal feasibility, ( A.6d
) the dual feasibility and ( A.6e ), ( A.6f ) the complementary
slackness.

The derivative of the Lagrangian at the minimum is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the multiplier for the first inequality constraint, @xmath
for the second (power-limit) constraint and @xmath the equality
constraint multiplier. When reducing the conditions to @xmath , @xmath .
When considering that the power constraint is always loosely bound with
@xmath , then by ( A.6f ), @xmath .

Solving the remainder for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be inserted into the equality constraint of ( A.5 ) to yield
the water-level, @xmath , by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The water-level can be found via an iterative search over the vector
@xmath of channels that contribute a positive power. Since the sum power
is reduced on each iteration, the power constraint (accounted for by the
multiplier @xmath ) only needs to be tested after the search is
finished.

## Appendix B List of Publications

This chapter contains a list of publications related to this thesis
ordered by academic publication status (published, accepted, submitted)
and other type (project reports and book contributions).

### b.1 Published

-   Gunther Auer and István Gódor and László Hévizi and Muhammad Ali
    Imran and Jens Malmodin and Péter Fasekas and Gergely Biczók and
    Hauke Holtkamp and Dietrich Zeller and Oliver Blume and Rahim
    Tafazolli, “Enablers for Energy Efficient Wireless Networks”,
    Proceedings of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC)
    Fall-2010 , 2010 [ Auer et al. , 2010 ]

-    Hauke Holtkamp and Gunther Auer, “Fundamental Limits of
    Energy-Efficient Resource Sharing, Power Control and Discontinuous
    Transmission”, Proceedings of the Future Network & Mobile Summit
    2011 , 2011 [ Holtkamp & Auer, 2011 ]

-    Hauke Holtkamp and Gunther Auer and Harald Haas, “Minimal Average
    Consumption Downlink Base Station Power Control Strategy”,
    Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 22nd International Symposium on
    Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC) , 2011 [
    Holtkamp et al. , 2011b ]

-    Hauke Holtkamp and Gunther Auer and Harald Haas, “On Minimizing
    Base Station Power Consumption”, Proceedings of the Vehicular
    Technology Conference (VTC) Fall-2011 , 2011 [ Holtkamp et al. ,
    2011a ]

-   Claude Desset and Björn Debaillie and Vito Giannini and Albrecht
    Fehske and Gunther Auer and Hauke Holtkamp and Wieslawa Wajda and
    Dario Sabella and Fred Richter and Manuel Gonzalez and Henrik
    Klessig and István Gódor and Per Skillermark and Magnus Olsson and
    Muhammad Ali Imran and Anton Ambrosy and Oliver Blume, “Flexible
    Power Modeling of LTE Base Stations”, Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE
    Wireless Communications and Networking Conference: , 2012 [ Desset
    et al. , 2012 ]

-    Hauke Holtkamp and Gunther Auer and Samer Bazzi and Harald Haas,
    “Minimizing Base Station Power Consumption”, IEEE Journal on
    Selected Areas in Communications , 2014 [ Holtkamp et al. , 2013a ]

### b.2 Accepted

-    Hauke Holtkamp and Gunther Auer and Vito Giannini and Harald Haas,
    “A Parameterized Base Station Power Model”, IEEE Communications
    Letters , 2013 [ Holtkamp et al. , 2013b ]

-    Hauke Holtkamp and Harald Haas, “OFDMA Base Station Power-saving
    Via Joint Power Control and DTX in Cellular Systems”, Proceedings of
    the Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC) Fall-2013 , 2013 [
    Holtkamp & Haas, 2013 ]

### b.3 Submitted

-    Hauke Holtkamp and Guido Dietl and Harald Haas, “Distributed DTX
    Alignment with Memory”, Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE International
    Conference on Communications (ICC) , 2014 [ Holtkamp et al. , 2013 ]

### b.4 Project Reports

-   EARTH Project Work Package 2, “Deliverable D2.2: Reference Systems
    and Scenarios”, 2012

-   EARTH Project Work Package 3, “Deliverable D3.3: Green Network
    Technologies”, 2012 [ EARTH Project Work Package 3, 2012 ]

### b.5 Contributions

-   Jinsong Wu and Sundeep Rangan and Honggang Zhang, “Green
    Communications: Theoretical Fundamentals, Algorithms and
    Applications”, Taylor & Francis Group , 2012 [ Wu et al. , 2012a ]

## Appendix C Attached Publications

This chapter contains all work either published or submitted for
publication to academic conferences or journals. For brevity, EARTH
project deliverables [ EARTH Project Work Package 3, 2012 ] and a book
chapter [ Wu et al. , 2012a ] are not listed here.
