This research is a contribution to our understanding of the information
content of the cosmological dark matter density field, and of the means
to extract this information. These questions are of prime importance in
order to reach closer for solutions to current fundamental issues in
cosmology, such as the nature of dark matter and dark energy, that
future large galaxy surveys are aiming at. The focus is on a traditional
class of observables, the @xmath -point functions, that we approach with
known information theoretic tools, Fisher information and Shannon
information entropy. It is built out of two main parts, the first
presenting in details the mathematical methods we used and introduced,
and the second the cosmological research that was performed with these
tools.
A large fraction of this thesis is dedicated to the study of the
information content of random fields with heavy tails, in particular the
lognormal field, a model for the matter density fluctuation field. It is
well known that in the nonlinear regime of structure formation, the
matter fluctuation field develops such large tails. It has also been
suggested that fields with large tails are not necessarily well
described by the hierarchy of @xmath -point functions. In this thesis,
we are able to make this last statement precise and with the help of the
lognormal model to quantify precisely its implications for inference on
cosmological parameters : we find as our main result that only a tiny
fraction of the total Fisher information of the field is still contained
in the hierarchy of @xmath -point moments in the nonlinear regime,
rendering parameter inference from such moments very inefficient. We
show that the hierarchy fails to capture the information that is
contained in the underdense regions, which at the same time are found to
be the most rich in information. We find further our results to be very
consistent with numerical analysis using @xmath -body simulations. We
also discuss these issues with the help of explicit families of fields
with the same hierarchy of @xmath -point moments defined in this work. A
similar analysis is then applied to the convergence field, the weighted
projection of the matter density fluctuation field along the line of
sight, with similar conclusions. We also show how simple mappings can
correct for this inadequacy, consistently with previous findings in the
literature.
These results were made possible using an expansion of the Fisher
information matrix in uncorrelated components associated to @xmath
-points moments of successive orders. An entire chapter is dedicated to
this expansion, investigating its properties and making a connection to
the moment problem in the field of mathematics. Some simple models
exactly solvable at all orders are also presented.
Beside these investigations of the statistical power of the hierarchy of
@xmath -point moments, we also study the combination of various probes
of the convergence field, including the magnification, shear and flexion
fields, in particular at the two-point level. We use Shannon information
entropy to discuss the simple structure of the information within these
tracers of the lensing potential field. We then evaluate the prospects
for such a combination according to current understanding of the
relevant dispersion parameters. Finally, we revisit known derivations of
the Fisher information matrix for Gaussian variables, commenting in this
light on the use of Gaussian likelihoods for power spectra or two-point
correlation function estimators in cosmology. We point towards the fact
that despite their motivation from the central limit theorem, care must
be taken in the case of a large number of fields, as this assumption
assigns too much information to the observables.
