Geometry and topology play key roles in the encoding of quantum
information in physical systems. Ability to detect and exploit
geometrical and topological invariants is particularly useful when
dealing with transmission, protection and measurement of the fragile
quantum information. In this Thesis, we study quantum information
carriers associated with discrete or continuous degrees of freedom that
live on various geometries and topologies.

In the first part of this study, intrigued by the possibility of
implementing quantum communication protocols in space, we analyze the
effects of a gravitational field on the polarization of photons. In this
case, we investigate discrete degrees of freedom moving on a continuous
space-time: Specifically, we look at the geometrical description of the
problem. We find that for closed trajectories, in both static and
general space-times, the amount of rotation, or phase, caused by the
action of gravity is independent of the reference frame chosen to define
the polarization vector. We also prove that similarly to other instances
of a geometric phase, its value is given by the integral of the (bundle)
curvature over the surface that is encircled by the trajectory.

In the second part we study a new approach to topological quantum
information by using Gaussian states to construct a system that exhibits
topological order. We describe a (Gaussian) continuous-variable state
analog to Kitaev surface codes prepared using quantum harmonic
oscillators on a two-dimensional discrete lattice, which has the
distinctive property of needing only two-body nearest-neighbor
interactions for its creation. We show that although such a model is
gapless, it satisfies an area law. Its ground state can be simply
prepared by measurements on a finitely squeezed and gapped
two-dimensional cluster-state, which does not exhibit topological order.
A universal signature of topologically ordered phases is the topological
entanglement entropy. Due to low signal to noise ratio it is extremely
difficult to observe the topological entanglement entropy in qubit-based
systems, and one usually resorts to measuring anyonic statistics of
excitations or non-local string operators to reveal the order. We prove
that for our continuous-variable model the topological entanglement
entropy can be observed simply via quadrature measurements, in contrast
with qubit-based systems. This provides a practical path to observe
topological order in bosonic systems using current technology.

In the third and last part we study the well-definiteness of the concept
of entropy in a scheme alternative to Schrödinger quantization: Polymer
quantization. The kinematical construction of the Hilbert space in
polymer quantization is based on the discretization of the real line,
which is treated as a one-dimensional graph with discrete topology. On
such a setup, which resembles the more complicated construction of loop
quantum gravity, we analyze whether the values of the quantum entropy
computed in the Schrödinger and polymer quantization coincide or not. We
study the convergence of the entropies of physically equivalent states
in unitarily inequivalent representations of the Weyl-Heisenberg algebra
and derive a general bound to relate the values of entropy.
