  The dark side of the universe is mysterious and its nature is still
  unknown. In fact, this poses perhaps as the biggest challenge in the
  modern cosmology. The two components of the dark sector (dark matter
  and dark energy) correspond today to around ninety five percent of the
  universe. The simplest dark energy candidate is a cosmological
  constant. However, this attempt presents a huge discrepancy of 120
  orders of magnitude between the theoretical prediction and the
  observed data. Such a huge disparity motivates physicists to look into
  a more sophisticated models. This can be done either looking for a
  deeper understanding of where the cosmological constant comes from, if
  one wants to derive it from first principles, or considering other
  possibilities for accelerated expansion, such as modifications of
  general relativity, additional matter fields and so on. Still
  regarding a dynamical dark energy, there may exist a possibility of
  interaction between dark energy and dark matter, since their densities
  are comparable and, depending on the coupling used, the interaction
  can also alleviate the issue of why dark energy and matter densities
  are of the same order today. Phenomenological models have been widely
  explored in the literature. On the other hand, field theory models
  that aim a consistent description of the dark energy/dark matter
  interaction are still few. In this thesis, we explore either a scalar
  or a vector field as a dark energy candidate in several different
  approaches, taking into account a possible interaction between the two
  components of the dark sector. The thesis is divided in three parts,
  which can be read independently of each other. In the first part, we
  analyze the asymptotic behavior of some cosmological models using
  either scalar or vector fields as dark energy candidates, in the light
  of the dynamical system theory. In the second part, we use a scalar
  field in the supergravity framework to build a model of dynamical dark
  energy and also to embed a holographic dark energy model into minimal
  supergravity. Finally, in the third part, we propose a model of
  metastable dark energy, in which the dark energy is a scalar field
  with a potential given by the sum of even self-interactions up to
  order six. We insert the metastable dark energy into a dark @xmath
  model, where the dark energy doublet and the dark matter doublet
  naturally interact with each other. Such an interaction opens a new
  window to investigate the dark sector from the point-of-view of
  particle physics.
