Pulsars are one of the most fascinating objects in the known Universe.
The very nature of their regular pulsation led to their discovery in the
early days. They were the first to provide sound evidence about the
existence of the neutron stars. In the last 47 years since the discovery
of these objects, extensive research has been carried out to investigate
the origin of the pulsar radiation. There have been many attempts to
scrutinize the bright radio emission seen from pulsars by utilizing
numerous observed phenomena. One of such phenomena is the rapid
shape-changes in the observed single pulses in spite of their average
profile showing remarkable stability for observations separated by
decades. The sporadic nature of the single pulses provides important
clues regarding the chaotic nature of the pulsar radiation. Thus,
enormous amount of research have been focused on the modelling of the
single pulses. There are different types of single pulse phenomena seen
in the radio pulsar viz. drifting, nulling and mode-changing, which also
shows interdependence in certain cases. Drifting and mode-changing has
been modelled to some extent by many previous studies. However, nulling
is one of the unexplained phenomena seen in the radio pulsars. The
absence of emission in the individual single pulses has defied
satisfactory explanation since its discovery 44 years ago.

Nulling in the radio pulsars has been reported by bac70 for the first
time in four pulsars. Since its discovery, around 109 pulsars were
reported to show prominent nulling behaviour in their single pulses.
Nulling in pulsars has been historically quantified as the fraction of
observed null pulses, also known as the nulling fraction (NF). In order
to find the operating mechanism that causes only a few pulsars to
exhibit noticeable nulling behaviour, NFs were compared with many pulsar
parameters by various groups rit76 ; ran86 ; big92a ; viv95 ; wmj07 .
However, no strong correlation between the NF and any pulsar parameter
has been reported to date. rit76 has reported that if the pulsar period
is long, it is likely to have high nulling fraction compared to short
period pulsars. As the period of the pulsar is directly related to its
characteristic age, rit76 speculated that pulsars die with increasing
fraction of nulls in them. Contrary to that, ran86 presented an
alternative hypothesis of correlation with the profile classes, where no
dependence was noticed between NF and age of the pulsar in a similar
profile morphological class. It was extensively shown in a study of
around 60 pulsars, that the nulling fraction is likely to be less than
1% in pulsars exhibiting core component, while, it is more likely to
have higher nulling fraction in pulsars exhibiting conal profile ran86 .
In a separate study by big92a , NF was confirmed to show correlation
with the profile classes along with a few weak correlations. However,
wmj07 has shown that nulling does not show correlation with profile
morphological classes as profiles with almost all classes show similar
nulling behaviour. Moreover, wmj07 suggested that nulling is an extreme
form of mode-changing phenomenon. Thus, there is no common agreement
between different studies regarding the true nature of any correlation.

The degree and form of pulse nulling varies from one pulsar to another.
On one hand, there are pulsars such as PSR B0826 @xmath 34 dll+79 which
null most of the time, and PSR J1752+2359 lwf+04 , which exhibits no
radio emission for 3 to 4 minutes. In contrast, pulsars such as PSR
B0809+74 show a small degree of nulling la83 . Pulse nulling is frequent
in pulsars such as PSR B1112+50, while it is very sporadic in PSR B1642
@xmath 03 rit76 . Moreover, the pulsed emission abruptly declines by
more than two orders of magnitudes during these nulls la83 ; vj97 ,
which are as yet not well understood. While nulling pulsars have been
known for last three decades, the recently discovered new class of
sources, such as Rotating Radio transients mll+06 ; km11 ; bjb+12 and
intermittent pulsars klo+06 ; crc+12 ; llm+12 , also show a behaviour
similar to classical nullers and are increasingly believed to be nulling
pulsars bjb+12 , indicating that nulling occurs in a significant
fraction of pulsar population.

Pulsar emission at different radio frequencies, originates at different
locations in the pulsar magnetosphere kom70 . There are very few long
simultaneous observations of nulling pulsars reported so far in the
literature. In a simultaneous single pulse study of two pulsars, PSRs
B0329+54 and B1133+16 at 327 and 2695 MHz, bs78 showed highly correlated
pulse energy fluctuations. Simultaneous observations of PSR B0809+74 for
about 350 pulses indicated that only 6 out of 9 nulls were simultaneous
at 102 and 408 MHz ( dls+84 ) . About half of nulls were reported to
occur simultaneously at 325, 610, 1400 and 4850 MHz for PSR B1133+16 (
bgk+07 ) . In contrast, simultaneous nulls were reported at 303 and 610
MHz for PSR B0826 @xmath 34 ( bgg08 ) . It is not clear if nulling
represents a global failure of pulse radiation or is due to a shift in
pulsar beam manifesting as lack of emission at the given observation
frequency due to the geometry of pulse emission.

In light of all these previous investigations, long, sensitive, and
preferably simultaneous observations at multiple frequencies of a
carefully selected sample of pulsars are motivated. Thus, the aim of
this thesis is to quantify, model and compare nulling behaviour between
different classes of pulsars to scrutinize the true nature of the
nulling phenomenon.

In this thesis, main results on three main investigations are discussed
with the necessary background for each of them. In Chapter 1, basic
introduction to the pulsars is provided. Details regarding the structure
of the pulsar surroundings and origin of the radio emission are briefly
derived in Chapter 2. Observations conducted for each investigation, are
summarised with necessary details in Chapter 3. Further three chapters
discuss results on the individual study. Chapter 4 presents results on
the survey of nulling pulsar conducted using the GMRT. A comparison
study between two high nulling fraction pulsars are discussed in Chapter
5. Unique simultaneous multi-frequency observations of two pulsars are
summarised in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 presents summary of all the obtained
results in the thesis along with a comprehensive view about the nulling
behaviour suggested by our observations.

The chapter wise summary of this thesis is given below. First three
chapters provide necessary background, along with the details regarding
various observations.
