In this thesis, we mainly investigate the lattice coding problem of the downlink communication between a base station and multiple users. The base station broadcasts a message containing each user’s intended message. The capacity limit of such a system setting is already well-known while the design of practical coding and modulation schemes to approach the theoretical limit has not been fully studied and investigated in the literature. This thesis attempts to address this problem by providing a systematic design on lattice coding and modulation schemes for downlink multiuser communication. The main idea is to exploit the structure property of lattices to harness interference from downlink users. The research work of this thesis can be divided into five parts.

In the first part of our research, we focus on designing a class of lattice codes to approach the capacity of the classical point-to-point communication channel before we address the multiuser systems in the later chapters. A novel encoding structure of our multi-dimensional lattice codes is introduced and this approach is proved to allow our designed codes exhibit symmetry and permutation-invariance properties. By exploring these two properties, the degree distributions and the decoding thresholds of our codes are optimized by using one-dimensional extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, which were mainly used for designing binary linear codes previously.

After the success in point-to-point communications, we move on to multiuser communications based on discrete and finite channel inputs. The second part of our research is to design practical lattice coding schemes for downlink non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) without successive interference cancellation (SIC) at the receiver. We first consider the case where the transmitter and receiver have full channel knowledge and propose a framework based on lattice partitions. The individual achievable rate of the proposed framework based on any lattice is derived and its gap to the multiuser capacity is upper bounded by a constant that is only related to the normalized second moment of the underlying lattice.

Next in the third part of our research, we investigate the slow fading scenario where the transmitter does not have full channel state information (CSI). For such a case, the generalization from our previous design with full CSI is non-trivial. Thus, we propose a new scheme for downlink NOMA without SIC by designing coding and modulation schemes based on statistical CSI while the power allocation factors are naturally induced by the design. The individual outage rate is analyzed and its gap to the multiuser outage capacity is proved to be upper bounded by a constant that is universal to the base station power, channel gain, and the number of downlink users.

In the fourth part of our research, we study the problem of downlink communication through block fading channels where the base station does not have CSI. Realizing that our previous two designs in this channel achieve no diversity gain, we propose a class of NOMA schemes by mapping all the users’ messages to the same n-dimensional algebraic lattices constructed from algebraic number fields. The minimum product distance of the superimposed constellation is analyzed in detailed as it is closely related to the error performance. We show that, even without SIC at the receiver, our scheme can still offer full diversity to each user and provide high coding gain.

Finally, in the last part of our research, we conduct an additional work by designing error-correction codes for ultra-reliable applications such as fibre-optic communication systems and data-storage systems. For this work, we develop a class of product codes with high code rate and low error floor. The unique encoding structure allows the decoder to easily detect and correct more error patterns that contribute to the error floor. Moreover, an efficient post processing technique is proposed to enhance the decoding performance by further lowering the error floor. Theoretical analysis of the error pattern occurrence and the decoding performance is provided.
