Loop quantum gravity is a tentative but relatively well-developed
attempt at a manifestly background independent theory of quantum
gravity. The kinematical structure of loop quantum gravity is well
understood, with the elementary kinematical states of the theory having
a physically appealing interpretation as states describing quantized,
discrete spatial geometries. However, formulating the dynamics of the
theory in a fully satisfactory way has proven to be surprisingly
challenging, and to a significant extent, the issue of dynamics still
remains an open problem in loop quantum gravity.

In this thesis we consider the problem of dynamics in canonical loop
quantum gravity, primarily in the context of deparametrized models, in
which a scalar field is taken as a physical time variable for the
dynamics of the gravitational field. The dynamics of the quantum states
of the gravitational field is then generated directly by a physical
Hamiltonian operator, instead of being implicitly defined through the
kernel of a Hamiltonian constraint. The deparametrized approach
therefore bypasses many of the considerable technical difficulties one
encounters when working with the constraint operator.

We introduce a new construction of a Hamiltonian operator for loop
quantum gravity, which has both mathematical and practical advantages in
comparison to earlier proposals. Most importantly, our Hamiltonian can
be constructed as a symmetric operator, and is therefore a
mathematically consistent candidate for a generator of unitary physical
time evolution in deparametrized models. Furthermore, by employing the
recently introduced curvature operator in our construction, we obtain a
significant practical simplification in the structure of the Hamiltonian
operator.

After having completed the definition of several variations of the new
Hamiltonian, we develop methods for evaluating the dynamics generated by
a given physical Hamiltonian in an approximate form, even if an exact
solution to the eigenvalue problem of the Hamiltonian cannot be
achieved. In particular, we show that for large values of the
Barbero–Immirzi parameter, the Euclidean part of the Hamiltonian can be
considered as a perturbation over the comparatively simple curvature
operator, and hence standard perturbation theory can be used to
approximate the spectrum of the complete Hamiltonian in terms of the
known eigenvalues and eigenstates of the curvature operator. We
illustrate the use of our approximation methods with simple numerical
calculations.

We also introduce a new representation for intertwiners in loop quantum
gravity. By considering intertwiners projected onto coherent states of
angular momentum, we obtain a description in which intertwiners are
represented as polynomials of certain complex variables, and operators
in loop quantum gravity are expressed as differential operators acting
on these variables. This makes it possible to describe the action of the
Hamiltonian geometrically, in terms of the unit vectors parametrizing
the angular momentum coherent states, as opposed to complicated,
non-intuitive expressions involving combinations of the Wigner @xmath
-symbols of @xmath recoupling theory. The new representation could
therefore turn out to be a useful tool for analyzing the dynamics in
loop quantum gravity.

In addition to reviewing the results of the author’s scientific work,
this thesis also gives a thorough introduction to the basic framework of
canonical loop quantum gravity, as well as a self-contained presentation
of the graphical formalism for @xmath recoupling theory, which is the
invaluable tool for performing practical calculations in loop quantum
gravity in the spin network basis. The author therefore hopes that parts
of this thesis could serve as a comprehensible source of information for
anyone interested in learning the elements of loop quantum gravity.
