Reproducibility should be a cornerstone of science. It plays an
essential role in research validation and reuse. In recent years, the
scientific community and the general public became increasingly aware of
the reproducibility crisis , i.e. the wide-spread inability of
researchers to reproduce published work, including their own. The
reproducibility crisis has been identified in most branches of
data-driven science. The effort required to document, clean, preserve,
and share experimental resources has been described as one of the core
contributors to this irreproducibility challenge. Documentation,
preservation, and sharing are key reproducible research practices that
are of little perceived value for scientists, as they fall outside the
traditional academic reputation economy that is focused on
novelty-driven scientific contributions.

Scientific research is increasingly focused on the creation,
observation, processing, and analysis of large data volumes. On one
hand, this transition towards computational and data-intensive science
poses new challenges for research reproducibility and reuse. On the
other hand, increased availability and advances in computation and web
technologies offer new opportunities to address the reproducibility
crisis. A prominent example is the World Wide Web (WWW), which was
developed in response to researchers’ needs to quickly share research
data and findings with the scientific community. The WWW was invented at
the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN). CERN is a key
laboratory in High Energy Physics (HEP), one of the most data-intensive
scientific domains. This thesis reports on research connected in the
context of CERN Analysis Preservation ( CAP ), a Research Data
Management (RDM) service tailored to CERN’s major experiments. We use
this scientific environment to study the role and requirements of
interactive tools in facilitating reproducible research.

In this thesis, we build a wider understanding of researchers’
interactions with tools that support research documentation,
preservation, and sharing. From an Human-Computer Interaction ( HCI )
perspective the following aspects are fundamental: (1) Characterize and
map requirements and practices around research preservation and reuse.
(2) Understand the wider role and impact of RDM tools in scientific
workflows. (3) Design tools and interactions that promote, motivate, and
acknowledge reproducible research practices.

Research reported in this thesis represents the first systematic
application of HCI methods in the study and design of interactive tools
for reproducible science. We have built an empirical understanding of
reproducible research practices and the role of supportive tools through
research in HEP and across a variety of scientific fields. We designed
prototypes and implemented services that aim to create rewarding and
motivating interactions. We conducted mixed-method evaluations to assess
the User Experience ( UX ) of the designs, in particular related to
usefulness, suitability, and persuasiveness. We report on four empirical
studies in which 42 researchers and data managers participated.

In the first interview study, we asked HEP data analysts about RDM
practices and invited them to explore and discuss CAP. Our findings show
that tailored preservation services allow for introducing and promoting
meaningful rewards and incentives that benefit contributors in their
research work. Here, we introduce the term secondary usage forms of RDM
tools. While not part of the core mission of the tools, secondary usage
forms motivate contributions through meaningful rewards. We extended
this research through a cross-domain interview study with data analysts
and data stewards from a diverse set of scientific fields. Based on the
findings of this cross-domain study, we contribute a Stage-Based Model
of Personal RDM Commitment Evolution that explains how and why
scientists commit to open and reproducible science.

To address the motivation challenge, we explored if and how gamification
can motivate contributions and promote reproducible research practices.
To this end, we designed two prototypes of a gamified preservation
service that was inspired by CAP. Each gamification prototype makes use
of different underlying mechanisms. HEP researchers found both
implementations valuable, enjoyable, suitable, and persuasive. The
gamification layer improves visibility of scientists and research work
and facilitates content navigation and discovery. Based on these
findings, we implemented six tailored science badges in CAP in our
second gamification study. The badges promote and reward high-quality
documentation and special uses of preserved research. Findings from our
evaluation with HEP researchers show that tailored science badges enable
novel forms of research repository navigation and content discovery that
benefit users and contributors. We discuss how the use of tailored
science badges as an incentivizing element paves new ways for
interaction with research repositories.

Finally, we describe the role of HCI in supporting reproducible research
practices. We stress that tailored RDM tools can improve content
navigation and discovery, which is key in the design of secondary usage
forms. Moreover, we argue that incentivizing elements like gamification
may not only motivate contributions, but further promote secondary uses
and enable new forms of interaction with preserved research. Based on
our empirical research, we describe the roles of both HCI scholars and
practitioners in building interactive tools for reproducible science.
Finally, we outline our vision to transform computational and
data-driven research preservation through ubiquitous preservation
strategies that integrate into research workflows and make use of
automated knowledge recording.

In conclusion, this thesis advocates the unique role of HCI in
supporting, motivating, and transforming reproducible research practices
through the design of tools that enable effective RDM. We present
practices around research preservation and reuse in HEP and beyond. Our
research paves new ways for interaction with RDM tools that support and
motivate reproducible science.
