The main topic of this thesis is the analysis of evolution equations
reflecting issues in ecology and population dynamics. In mathematical
modelling, the impact of environmental elements and the interaction
between species is read into the role of heterogeneity in equations and
interactions in coupled systems. In this direction, we investigate three
separate problems, each corresponding to a chapter of this thesis.

The first problem addresses the evolution of a single population living
in an environment with a fast diffusion line. From a mathematical point
of view, this corresponds to a system of two coupled reaction-diffusion
equations working on domains of different dimensions, which is called as
in [ 20 ] a “road-field model”. We introduce a periodic dependence of
the reaction term in the direction of the fast diffusion line; in the
ecological interpretation, this corresponds to the presence of more and
less favourable zones for the growth of the population. Necessary and
sufficient conditions for persistence or extinction of the population
and the effects of the presence of the road are analysed through the
study of a suitable generalised principal eigenvalue, originally defined
in [ 16 ] . By comparison with the literature about reaction-diffusion
equations in periodic media, we show that the presence of the road has
no impact on the survival chances of the population, despite the
deleterious effect that is expected from fragmentation.

The second investigation regards a model describing the competition
between two populations in a situation of asymmetrically aggressive
interactions – one is the attacker and the other the defender . We
derive a system of ODEs from basic principles, obtaining a modified
Lotka-Volterra model relying on structural parameters as the fitness of
the population and the frequency and effectiveness of the attacks. The
evolution progresses through two possible scenarios, where only one
population survives. Then, the interpretation of one of the parameters
as the aggressiveness of the attacker population naturally raises
questions of controllability. With the aid of geometrical arguments we
characterise the set of initial conditions leading to the victory of the
attacker through a suitable (possibly time-dependant) strategy. Indeed,
we prove that bang-bang strategies are sufficient and sometimes
necessary over constant controls. Finally, we treat a time minimization
question.

The third and last part of this thesis analyses the time decay of some
evolution equations with classical and fractional time derivatives.
Carrying on an analysis started in [ 43 ] , we deal with evolution
equations with a possibly mixed Caputo and classical time derivative. By
using energy methods, we prove quantitative estimates of polynomial or
exponential type; the different behaviour depends heavily on the choice
of the time derivative. The decay results apply to a large class of
diffusion operators, comprehending local, nonlocal, real, complex, and
even nonlinear ones, of which we provide concrete examples.
