Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) can play a key role in Medical
Image Analysis under large-scale annotated datasets. However, preparing
such massive dataset is demanding. In this context, Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) can generate realistic but novel samples,
and thus effectively cover the real image distribution. In terms of
interpolation, the GAN-based medical image augmentation is reliable
because medical modalities can display the human body’s strong
anatomical consistency at fixed position while clearly reflecting
inter-subject variability; thus, we propose to use noise-to-image GANs
(e.g., random noise samples to diverse pathological images) for ( i )
medical Data Augmentation (DA) and ( ii ) physician training. Regarding
the DA, the GAN-generated images can improve Computer-Aided Diagnosis
based on supervised learning. For the physician training, the GANs can
display novel desired pathological images and help train medical
trainees despite infrastructural/legal constraints. This thesis contains
four GAN projects aiming to present such novel applications’ clinical
relevance in collaboration with physicians. Whereas the methods are more
generally applicable, this thesis only explores a few oncological
applications.

In the first project, after proposing the two applications, we
demonstrate that GANs can generate realistic/diverse 128 @xmath 128
whole brain Magnetic Resonance (MR) images from noise samples—despite
difficult training, such noise-to-image GAN can increase image diversity
for further performance boost. Even an expert fails to distinguish the
synthetic images from the real ones in Visual Turing Test.

The second project tackles image augmentation for 2D classification.
Most CNN architectures adopt around 256 @xmath 256 input sizes; thus, we
use the noise-to-noise GAN, Progressive Growing of GANs (PGGANs), to
generate realistic/diverse 256 @xmath 256 whole brain MR images
with/without tumors separately. Multimodal UNsupervised Image-to-image
Translation further refines the synthetic images’ texture and shape. Our
two-step GAN-based DA boosts sensitivity 93.7% to 97.5% in 2D
tumor/non-tumor classification. An expert classifies a few synthetic
images as real.

The third project augments images for 2D detection. Further DA
applications require pathology localization for detection and advanced
physician training needs atypical image generation, respectively. To
meet both clinical demands, we propose Conditional PGGANs (CPGGANs) that
incorporates highly-rough bounding box conditions incrementally into the
noise-to-image GAN (i.e., the PGGANs) to place realistic/diverse brain
metastases at desired positions/sizes on @xmath MR images; the bounding
box-based detection requires much less physicians’ annotation effort
than segmentation. Our CPGGAN-based DA boosts sensitivity 83% to 91% in
tumor detection with clinically acceptable additional False Positives
(FPs). In terms of extrapolation, such pathology-aware GANs are
promising because common and/or desired medical priors can play a key
role in the conditioning—theoretically, infinite conditioning instances,
external to the training data, exist and enforcing such constraints have
an extrapolation effect via model reduction.

Finally, we solve image augmentation for 3D detection. Because lesions
vary in 3D position/appearance, 3D multiple pathology-aware conditioning
is important. Therefore, we propose 3D Multi-Conditional GAN (MCGAN)
that translates noise boxes into realistic/diverse @xmath lung nodules
placed naturally at desired position/size/attenuation on Computed
Tomography scans. Our 3D MCGAN-based DA boosts sensitivity in 3D nodule
detection under any nodule size/attenuation at fixed FP rates.
Considering the realism confirmed by physicians, it could perform as a
physician training tool to display realistic medical images with desired
abnormalities.

We confirm our pathology-aware GANs’ clinical relevance for diagnosis
via two discussions: ( i ) Conducting a questionnaire survey about our
GAN projects for 9 physicians; ( ii ) Holding a workshop about how to
develop medical Artificial Intelligence (AI) fitting into a clinical
environment in five years for 7 professionals with various AI and/or
Healthcare background.
