This thesis belongs to the area of General Topology and, in particular,
to the field of study of uniform spaces. It is divided in three parts
where the related topics Bourbaki-completeness and Samuel
realcompactification are studied. Many of the results presented here
have already been published by the author in the following papers.

1.   [GaMe14] M. I. Garrido and A. S. Meroño, New types of completeness
    in metric spaces , Ann. Acad. Sci. Fenn. Math. 39 (2014) 733-758.

2.   [GaMe16] M. I. Garrido and A. S. Meroño, On paracompactness,
    completeness and boundedness in uniform spaces , Topology Appl.
    203 (2016) 98-107.

3.   [GaMe17] M. I. Garrido and A. S. Meroño, The Samuel
    realcompactification of a metric space , J. Math. Anal. Appl.
    456 (2017) 1013-1039.

4.   [GaMe18] M. I. Garrido and A. S. Meroño, The Samuel
    realcompactification , Topology Appl. 241 (2018) 150-161.

5.   [HoJuMe19] A. Hohti, H. Junnila and A. S Meroño, On strongly
    Čech-complete spaces , to appear in Topology Appl. (2019).

In addition, new results, originated during the writing process, have
been included.

In the first part of the thesis we present many results of [GaMe14],
[GaMe16] and some of [HoJuMe19]. More precisely, we study
Bourbaki-completeness and cofinal Bourbaki-completeness (equivalently
uniform strong-paracompact- ness ) of uniform spaces. In particular, we
solve several primary problems related to products, subspaces,
hyperspaces, metric spaces and fine spaces.

Observe that these new concepts are respectively an extension of
completeness and cofinal completeness (equivalently, uniform
paracompactness ). Moreover, we show that completeness and cofinal
completeness are, respectively, equivalent to Bourbaki-completeness and
cofinal Bourbaki-completeness whenever we consider uniformities having a
base of star-finite covers (observe that this fact was partially proved
in [GaMe18]). Thus, this kind of uniform spaces are crucial along the
thesis. For instance, we show that every cofinally Bourbaki-complete
uniform space satisfies that its uniformity has a star-finite base.

In spite of the above equivalence, working with Bourbaki-Cauchy filters
, that is, those filters inducing the property of Bourbaki-completeness,
instead of Cauchy filters of the star-finite modification of a
uniformity, will be really useful, being particularly relevant in the
second part of the thesis.

In the second part of the thesis some of the main results of [HoJuMe19]
are included. This work began while the author was visiting the
University of Helsinki during the summer of 2014, under the supervision
of Heikki Junnila and Aarno Hohti. This paper is focused on studying a
topological property called strong-Čech-completeness , and, as
consequences, characterizations of the Bourbaki-completely metrizable
spaces and an universal space for Bourbaki-complete metric spaces are
obtained.

However, instead of using the topological property of strong
Čech-comple- teness, and since we need results that preserve certain
uniform structure, we have decided to start this second part with
embeddings. More precisely, we embed the Bourbaki-complete metric spaces
(and after, the Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces) into an universal
space, in such a way that the embedding is uniform in one way and its
inverse preserves at least Bourbaki-Cauchy filters.

Next, we characterized those metric spaces which are metrizable by a
Bourbaki-complete metric. These are exactly the spaces which are
completely metrizable spaces and strongly metrizable at the same time,
as it is shown in [HoJuMe19]. Moreover, we prove also that this is
equivalent to be metrizable by a complete metric satisfying that its
metric uniformity has a star-finite base. Notice that, in general, in
spite of the above result, Bourbaki-complete spaces do not have a
star-finite base for its uniformity, as we show in the first part of the
thesis.

Finally, we study those spaces metrizable by a cofinally
Bourbaki-complete metric. These are exactly the spaces which are
strongly paracompact and metrizable by a cofinally complete. Observe
that this result was already been published in [GaMe14]. It turns out
that the spaces metrizable by a cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric are
strictly stronger that those spaces metrizable by cofinally complete and
a Bourbaki-complete metric at the same time.

The third part of the thesis is dedicated to the Samuel
realcompactification of uniform spaces, which is related to the
well-known Samuel compactification, and contains all the results from
[GaMe18] which are the extension to uniform spaces of the results in
[GaMe17].

The first problem presented here is the characterization of the Samuel
realcompact spaces , that is, those uniform spaces which are complete
with the weak uniformity induced by all the real-valued uniformly
continuous functions on the space. It turns out that these are exactly
the Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces having no uniform partition of
Ulam-measurable cardinal. Observe that this result, which is a uniform
extension of the well-known Katětov-Shirota theorem characterizing the
realcompact spaces, is the link between the different parts of the
thesis. On the other hand, observe that, instead of proving this result
like in the papers [GaMe17] or [GaMe18] we use the embeddings from the
second part of the thesis.

Finally, as a natural step in order to generalize the above result, we
study which kind of metric or uniform spaces satisfy that the Samuel
realcompactification and the Hewitt realcompactification are equivalent.
However, we only provided partial results to this problem. These are not
published yet.
