This thesis proposes novel Small-Signal Stability Analysis (SSSA)-based
techniques that contribute to electric power system modal analysis,
automatic control, and numerical integration.

Modal analysis is a fundamental tool for power system stability analysis
and control. The thesis proposes a SSSA approach to determine the
Participation Factors (PFs) of algebraic variables in power system
dynamic modes. The approach is based on a new interpretation of the
classical modal PFs as eigen-sensitivities, as well as on the definition
of adequate inputs and outputs of the system’s state-space
representation. Both linear and generalized eigenvalue problems are
considered for the calculation of PFs and a theorem to cope with
eigenvalue multiplicities is presented.

SSSA is also ubiquitous in the synthesis of controllers for power
systems. The thesis explores SSSA techniques for the design of power
system controllers. The contributions on this topic are twofold, as
follows:

(i) Investigate a promising control approach, that is to synthesize
automatic regulators for power systems based on the theory of fractional
calculus. In particular, using eigenvalue analysis, a comprehensive
theory on the stability of power systems with inclusion of Fractional
Order Controllers (FOCs) is provided. Moreover, the software
implementation of FOCs based on Oustaloup’s Recursive Approximation
(ORA) method is discussed. A variety of FOC applications are
illustrated, namely, automatic generation control of synchronous
machines; frequency control of a converter-interfaced energy storage
system; and voltage control through a static synchronous compensator.

(ii) Propose a novel perspective on the potential impact of time delays
on power system stability. In general, measurement and communication of
control signals in electric energy networks introduces significant time
delays that are known to be a threat for the dynamic performance of
power systems. However, research in control theory has shown that, by
nature, delays are neutral and, if properly introduced, can also
stabilize a dynamical system. Through SSSA, the thesis systematically
identifies the control parameter settings for which delays in Power
System Stabilizers (PSSs) improve the damping of a power system. Both
analytical and simulation-based results are presented.

Finally, SSSA is utilized in the thesis to systematically propose a
delay-based method to reduce the coupling of the equations of power
system models for transient stability analysis. The method consists in
identifying the variables that, when subjected to a delay equal to the
time step of the numerical integration, leave practically unchanged the
system trajectories. Automatic selection of the variables and estimation
of the maximum admissible delay are carried out by SSSA-based
techniques. Such an one-step-delay approximation increases the sparsity
of the system Jacobian matrices and can be used in conjunction with
state-of-the-art techniques for the integration of
Differential-Algebraic Equations (DAEs). The proposed approach is
evaluated in terms of accuracy, convergence and computational burden.

Throughout the thesis, the proposed techniques are duly validated
through numerical tests based on real-world network models.
