Within the framework of equilibrium statistical mechanics the free
energy of a phase gives a measure of its associated probabilistic
weight. In order to determine phase boundaries one must then determine
the conditions under which the free energy difference (FED) between two
phases is zero. The underlying complexity usually rules out any
analytical approaches to the problem, and one must therefore adopt a
computational approach. The focus of this thesis is on (Monte Carlo)
methodologies for FEDs. In order to determine FEDs via Monte Carlo, the
simulation must (in principle) be able to visit the regions of
configuration space associated with both phases in a single simulation.
Generally however one finds that these regions are significantly
dissimilar, and are separated by an intermediate region of configuration
space of intrinsically low probability, so that a simulation initiated
in either of the phases will tend to remain in that phase. This effect
is generally referred to as the overlap problem and is the most
significant obstacle that one faces in the task of estimating FEDs.

In chapter \thechapter we start by formulating the FED problem using the
Phase Mapping (PM) technique of [ 1 ] . This technique allows one to
circumvent the intermediate regions of configuration space altogether by
mapping configurations of one phase directly onto those of the other.
Despite the improvement that one gets when formulating the problem via
the PM, the overlap problem persists, albeit to a lesser degree. In
chapter \thechapter we define precisely what we mean by overlap and then
discuss a range of methods that are available to us for calculating the
FEDs within the PM formalism. In the subsequent chapters we then focus
on the three generic strategies that arise in addressing the overlap
problem.

The first strategy that we focus on (chapter \thechapter ) is that of
the representation . This corresponds to the choice of coordinate system
with which one parameterises the degrees of freedom of the two phases.
The PM works by matching these coordinates in the two systems, and
therefore its efficiency in generating overlap is dependent on the
choice of representation. We examine a particular representation in
which the PM matches the fourier coordinates of the two phases in such a
way so as to achieve perfect overlap in the harmonic limit (for
structurally ordered phases). Previous formulations [ 1 ] have been
limited to the real-space PM (RSM). By comparing the RSM to the fourier
version (FSM), we show that for a range of temperatures the overlap
associated with the FSM is considerably better than that of the RSM,
thus allowing one to determine the FED efficiently under conditions in
which the RSM would otherwise fail.

The second strategy that we study (in chapter \thechapter ) is that of
the estimator which one uses to determine the free energy difference.
The different estimators pool the data from the various regions of
configurations space in different ways, and therefore have different
(systematic and statistical) errors associated with them. As a
consequence the severity of the overlap problem is dependent on the
estimator that one employs. We examine conditions under which the
different estimators are able to arrive at estimates which are free of
systematic errors.

Generally however, the scope for refinement of the representation and
the estimator is limited. In chapter \thechapter we deal with the third
and final strategy which appears in the FED problem; the refinement of
the sampling strategy . This involves the construction of a sampling
distribution which explores regions of configurations space outside
those typical of the two phases, and thereby engineers overlap. In
particular we examine three strategies. The first is the Multicanonical
strategy, and involves the introduction of corrections to the
configurational energy appearing in the Metropolis acceptance
probabilities, so as to force the simulation outside the regions
associated with the corresponding phase. The second that we examine, and
which has been developed here for the first time, is the
Multihamiltonian strategy. This involves the independent simulation of
several systems, which overlap in the regions of configuration space
that they explore, in a way which allows one to determine the FED. The
advantage of this method is that it is highly parallelizable in a way
that is not possible for the other two methods. The third and final
method that we study is the Fast Growth method, and involves performing
non-equilibrium work on the system so as to force it from the regions of
configuration space associated with one phase to those of the other. We
demonstrate that all three methods are effective in overcoming the
overlap problem.

The discussion until this point will be limited to the task of
determining phase boundaries within the purely classical framework. At
low temperatures, however, quantum effects begin to become increasingly
important; this is especially true for particles with light masses.
Generally there are two types of quantum effects that arise. The first
are quantum discretisation effects, which arise when the typical energy
is of the order to the phonon excitation energies. The second effect is
that of quantum exchange, which arises when the de Broglie wavelength
becomes roughly of the order of the interatomic spacing. In the final
part of this thesis (chapter \thechapter ) we address the additional
phenomena which arise from the quantum discretisation effects by
generalising the PM formalism so as to be applicable within the path
integral formulation of statistical mechanics. The path integral
approach allows one to obtain thermodynamic information of a quantum
system by modelling a classical system in which the interacting
particles are replaced by interacting polymers. The simulation of such a
system expends considerably more computational effort than its classical
counterpart, and as a result makes the calculation of the quantum FED
considerably more difficult. We get around this problem by using the
parallelizability of the Multihamiltonian method to divide the
computation of the quantum FED amongst several processors in a parallel
cluster. This allows us to examine the importance of zero point motion
on the quantum Lennard-Jones phase diagram.
