Cosmology has for a long time been a rather speculative science.
Hubble’s discovery that the Universe is expanding, and -more recently-
the realization that at present this expansion is accelerated, the
measured abundance of light elements, the mass distribution of galaxies
and clusters thereof, and the discovery and posterior measurements of
the anisotropies of the CMB have changed this picture. Hopefully,
measurements of GWs will soon be added to this short list. At any rate,
now we can speak confidently of physical cosmology as a fully–fledged
branch of Science.

The relic GWs constitute a privileged window to determine the evolution
of the Universe. Little is known from the early evolution of the
Universe and the predictions for their spectrum depend on the model
considered. According to these predictions, a spectrum of relic GWs is
generated making feasible its detection with the technology currently
being developed.

In this thesis, using the adiabatic vacuum approximation, we have
reviewed how the expansion of the Universe amplifies the quantum vacuum
fluctuations, and how the relic GWs spectrum is related with the scale
factor.

We have later evaluated the spectrum in a four-stage model (which
consist on a De Sitter stage, a stage dominated by a mixture of MBHs and
radiation, a radiation dominated stage and finally a non-relativistic
matter (dust) dominated stage). We have demonstrated that the spectrum
in this scenario is much lower than the predicted by three–stage model
(De Sitter-radiation era-dust era). We have also shown how the bound
over the GWs spectrum from the measured CMB anisotropies places severe
constraints over the free parameters of the four-stage model.

We have also considered a scenario featuring an accelerated expanding
era dominated by dark energy, right after the dust era of the
three–stage model. We have found that the current power spectrum of this
four–stage scenario exactly coincides with that of the three–stage, but
it evolves in a different fashion. We have considered as well the
possibility that the dark energy decays in non–relativistic matter
leading to a second dust era in the far future and obtained the power
spectrum of the GWs as well as the evolution of the density parameter.

We have applied the generalized second law of thermodynamics to the
four–stage model of above. Assuming the GWs entropy proportional to the
number of GWs, we have found the GSL is fulfilled provided a certain
proportionality constant does not exceed a given upper bound.

Finally, we have extended the GSL study to a single stage universe model
dominated by dark energy (either phantom or not), and found that the GSL
is satisfied and that the entropy of the phantom fluid is negative.
Likewise, we have found a transformation between phantom and non–phantom
scenarios preserving the Einstein field equations that entails a “quasi”
duality between the thermodynamics of both scenarios.
