I will begin by a few words on the layout of this thesis. At the end of each chapter
I give the main sources of information on the subject dealt with, and at the very end
of the first part there is a more complete set of references. I do not claim to include all
relevant references, and I apologize if someone has been left out.
This thesis consists of two parts, first an introduction to the subject and secondly
five articles. The introduction should serve two purposes; i) It should provide with the
physical perspective of the articles. ii) It should also provide with the necessary details
of the relevant background, such that the thesis becomes as self consistent as possible.
We hence start by giving a brief introduction to string theory with emphasis on the
example of the bosonic string. In order to fully appreciate string theory it is necessary
to study the dynamics of the surface that the string traces out when moving in spacetime. This is described by what is known as conformal field theory, which is the subject
of chapter two. After this digression we return to string theory to give some insight into
how the results of the articles contained in this thesis could provide with interresting
ingredients for constructions of realistic string theories. This is also continued on to
some extent in chapter seven and eight.
The articles in this thesis are discussing mainly two subjects, gauged WZNW models
and affine branching functions. The background for those issues is given in chapter
seven and eight.
In the articles contained in this thesis we use two major tools. First affine Lie algebras and its representation theory, and secondly BRST quantization. In chapter four and five we deal with affine Lie algebras, and in chapter six we try to illuminate some issues on BRST quantization.
In paper I is the relation of the gauged WZNW model in the path integral approach
and the algebraic Goddard-Kent-Olive coset construction discussed. We show, by use
of BRST techniques, that for a restricted set of representations the two approaches
coincide.
In the last section of paper I a branching function for affine Lie algebras is introduced. This formula for branching functions is further elaborated on in paper II and III. In paper II we present an independent proof of the formula’s validity. Paper III
deals with explicit general examples which are calculated in detail.
In paper IV we lift the restriction on the representations introduced in paper I where
it was used to calculate the BRST cohomology. We present a method to construct states
in the cohomology for arbitrary representations, and find that there exists states at for
all ghost numbers in the cohomology.
Paper V deals with the gauged supersymmetric WZNW model. We give a Lagrangian formulation for the algebraic N = 1 supersymmetric coset construction.
