Within the framework of lattice QCD we investigate different aspects of
QCD in Landau gauge using Monte Carlo simulations. In particular, we
focus on the low momentum behavior of gluon and ghost propagators. The
gauge group is that of QCD, namely @xmath . For our study of the lattice
gluodynamic, simulations were performed on several lattice sizes ranging
from @xmath to @xmath at the three values of the inverse coupling
constant @xmath , 6.0 and 6.2.

Different systematic effects on the gluon and ghost propagators are
studied. We demonstrate that the ghost dressing function systematically
depends on the choice of Gribov copies at low momentum, while the
influence on the gluon dressing function is not resolvable. Also the
eigenvalue distribution of the Faddeev-Popov operator is sensitive to
Gribov copies.

We show that the influence of dynamical Wilson fermions on the ghost
propagator is negligible at the momenta available to us. For this we
have used gauge configurations which were generated with two dynamical
flavors of clover-improved Wilson fermions. On the contrary, fermions
affect the gluon propagator at large and intermediate momenta, in
particular where the gluon propagator exposes its characteristic
enhancement compared to the free propagator.

We also analyze data for both propagators obtained on asymmetric
lattices. By comparing these results with data obtained on symmetric
lattices, we find that both the gluon and the ghost propagator suffer
from systematic effects at the lowest on-axis momenta available on
asymmetric lattices.

We compare our data with the infrared exponents predicted in studies of
truncated systems of Dyson-Schwinger equations for the gluon and ghost
propagators. We cannot confirm neither the values for both exponents nor
the relation which is proposed to hold between them. In any case, we
demonstrate that the infrared behavior of gluon and ghost propagators,
as found in this thesis, is consistent with different criteria for
confinement. In fact, we verify that our data of the ghost propagator
and also of the Kugo-Ojima confinement parameter satisfy the Kugo-Ojima
confinement criterion. The Gribov-Zwanziger horizon condition is
satisfied by the ghost propagator. Also the gluon propagator seems to
vanish in the zero-momentum limit. However, we cannot judge without
doubt on the existence of an infrared vanishing gluon propagator.
Furthermore, explicit violation of reflection positivity by the
transverse gluon propagator is shown for the quenched and unquenched
case of @xmath gauge theory.

The running coupling constant given as a renormalization-group-invariant
combination of the gluon and ghost dressing functions does not expose a
finite infrared fixed point. Rather the data are in favor of an infrared
vanishing coupling constant. This behavior does not change if the Gribov
ambiguity or unquenching effects are taken into account. We also report
on a first nonperturbative computation of the @xmath ghost-gluon-vertex
renormalization constant. We find that it deviates only weakly from
being constant in the momentum subtraction scheme considered here.

We present results of an investigation of the spectral properties of the
Faddeev-Popov operator at @xmath and 6.2 using the lattice sizes @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . For this we have calculated the low-lying
eigenvalues and eigenmodes of the Faddeev-Popov operator. The larger the
volume the more eigenvalues are found accumulated close to zero. Using
the eigenmodes for a spectral representation of the ghost propagator it
turns out that for our smallest lattice only 200 eigenvalues and
eigenmodes are sufficient to saturate the ghost propagator at lowest
momentum. We associate exceptionally large values occurring occasionally
in the Monte Carlo history of the ghost propagator at larger @xmath to
extraordinary contributions of the low-lying eigenmodes.
