In this thesis I investigate aspects of two problems. In the first part
of this thesis, I will investigate how an effective field theory can be
constructed. One of the most fundamental questions in physics is how new
degrees of freedom emerge from a fundamental theory. In the Hamiltonian
framework this can be rephrased as finding the correct representation
for the Hamiltonian matrix. The similarity (not essentially unitary)
renormalization group provides us with an intuitive framework, where a
transition from a perturbative region to a non-perturbative one can be
realised and physical properties can be computed in a unified way. In
this context, we have shown that the well-known coupled-cluster
many-body theory techniques can be incorporated in the Wilsonian
renormalization group to provide a very powerful framework for
construction of effective Hamiltonian field theories. Eventhough the
formulation is intrinsically non-perturbative, we have shown that a
loop-expansion can be implemented.

The second part of my thesis is rather phenomenologically orientated. In
this part, I will employ an effective field-theoretical model as can be
constructed by means of the techniques of the first part of my thesis, a
quark-confining non-local Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model and study the nucleon
and diquarks in this model. For certain parameters the model exhibits
quark confinement, in the form of a propagator without real poles. After
truncation of the two-body channels to the scalar and axial-vector
diquarks, a relativistic Faddeev equation for nucleon bound states is
solved in the covariant diquark-quark picture. The dependence of the
nucleon mass on diquark masses is studied in detail. We find parameters
that lead to a simultaneous reasonable description of pions and
nucleons. Both the diquarks contribute attractively to the nucleon mass.
Axial-vector diquark correlations are seen to be important, especially
in the confining phase of the model. We study the possible implications
of quark confinement for the description of the diquarks and the
nucleon. In particular, we find that it leads to a more compact nucleon.
