In this thesis, entitled “Thermodynamics of QCD-inspired theories” the
behavior of (quark) matter under extreme high temperatures and densities
is investigated. Such extreme conditions can be reached for example in
the early universe shortly after the big bang, during a heavy-ion
collision and inside the core of a neutron star. They can be so extreme
that normal nuclear matter does longer exist, such that matter is in a
different phase than usual, like for example the so-called quark-gluon
plasma (at high temperatures and/or densities) or the
color-superconducting phase (at high densities).

A general introduction to this thesis is given in Chapter 1. Firstly, it
will be discussed what could happen to matter under such extreme
conditions. Then, the relevant aspects of quantum chromodynamics (QCD)
(the theory which describes the interactions between the quarks) will be
explained shortly. Thereafter, an overview of the results and problems
of previous calculations of the pressure and the phase diagram of quark
matter are given. The relevance of these kind of calculations for the
understanding of a compact star, heavy ion collisions, and the state of
the universe shortly after the big bang, will be examined as well. At
the end of the chapter the term “QCD-inspired theories” will be
explained.

In Chapter 2 it is discussed how one can perform calculations at finite
temperature and densities in a field theory like QCD. For that, results
from statistical physics will be applied. Firstly, a short review of
classical statistical physics is given, which thereafter will be
generalized to a quantum mechanical approach. Using path-integrals it
will be discussed how this approach can be used in order to investigate
quantum field theories at finite temperature and densities. In
calculations at finite temperature and densities one often has to
perform summations over an infinite number of terms. A method to perform
these sums exactly will be discussed. Also it will be explained in
detail how these summations can be computed numerically for more
difficult cases.

The third chapter treats the so-called effective potential and the
@xmath expansion. The effective potential is an important quantity,
since the pressure and the phase diagrams can be obtained by minimizing
this potential. The @xmath expansion is a method which can be used to
investigate the non-perturbative (in the coupling constant) behavior of
some theories. It will be explained how this expansion can be obtained
by the introduction of auxiliary fields. At the end of this chapter an
important result of this thesis, which is the occurrence of
temperature-dependent divergences in the effective potential, will be
discussed. Such divergences cannot be renormalized properly. These
divergences become independent of the temperature at the minimum of the
effective potential. That is just at the point at which one has to
evaluate the effective potential in order to obtain the physical
quantities like the pressure and the phase diagram. At the minimum,
these divergences are no problem because there they can be renormalized
in a systematic way.

The subject of Chapter 4 is the thermodynamics of the nonlinear sigma
model in two dimensions. This model has some aspects with QCD in common
such as asymptotic freedom. Using the @xmath expansion it is possible to
investigate this model in the domain where it is non-perturbative in the
coupling constant. By studying this model one can learn something about
QCD at finite temperature, for example how the behavior of an
asymptotically free theory changes when going from low to high
temperatures. In this chapter, the effective potential will be
calculated to next-to-leading order (NLO) in @xmath . It turns out that
this effective potential contains temperature-dependent divergences
which can only be renormalized properly at the minimum. By minimizing
the effective potential, the pressure as a function of temperature is
obtained. It is found that @xmath is a good expansion method.
Furthermore it turns out that the pressure divided by the pressure in
the limit of infinite temperature is almost independent of @xmath .
Similar behavior is found in lattice calculations of SU( @xmath )
Yang-Mills theory.

Chapter 5 discusses the thermodynamics of the @xmath model in two
dimensions. This model is an extension of the nonlinear sigma model in
which also electromagnetism is taken into account. This model shares
also some features with QCD, it contains for example like QCD so-called
topological non-trivial vacua. The influence of these vacua on the
pressure is investigated using the same methods as in Chapter 4. It is
found that the non-trivial vacua give a large contribution in the region
in which the pressure as a function of the temperature raises quickly.
This result is a possible indication that topological non-trivial vacua
are important for the thermodynamics of QCD in the neighborhood of the
phase transition.

In Chapter 6 the thermodynamics of the linear and nonlinear sigma model
in four dimensions is investigated. These models are low-energy
effective theories of QCD. The pressure of these models is calculated to
NLO in @xmath . The most important result of these calculations is a
prediction for the pressure of two-flavor QCD at low temperatures. The
NLO correction is compared to predictions of this correction in the
literature. These predictions turn out to be wrong. Finally a relatively
low upper bound on the mass of the sigma meson is found. The mass of the
sigma meson has not yet been determined very accurately experimentally.
If this upper bound is a result of the approximations or occurs really
in QCD should be investigated further.

The phase diagram of the NJL model is examined in Chapter 7. The NJL
model is a low-energy effective theory of QCD as well. The phase
diagrams are calculated by minimizing the effective potential. The
calculations have been carried out for situations in which the densities
of the up, down and the strange quark are different, such as in a
compact star or in a heavy-ion collision. Next to the phase in which one
can find ordinary matter, different color-superconducting phases and
phases in which the pseudoscalar mesons condense are found. The results
of this chapter are an extension of earlier calculations in which either
only the color-superconducting phases or the phases in which the
pseudoscalar mesons condense were taken into account. The main result is
that these previous calculations are extended, such that one gets a more
complete picture of the phase diagram. Furthermore the competition
between the color-superconducting phase and the phase in which
pseudoscalar mesons condense is studied. It is found that they are
separated by a first-order phase transition. A possible extension of
this work would be the inclusion of color and electric neutrality
constraints, such that obtain the phase diagram of a compact star.
