The extended technicolor theory is a candidate of the physics beyond the
standard model. To explain the mass hierarchy of the quarks and leptons,
the extended technicolor gauge symmetry must hierarchically break to the
technicolor gauge symmetry. Tumbling gauge theory is considered as a
candidate of the dynamics of such hierarchical symmetry breaking, since
the sequential self-breaking of the gauge symmetry (“tumbling”) can be
expected in that theory.

It is well known that the extended technicolor theory induces too strong
flavor-changing neutral current interactions to be consistent with the
experiments. This problem can be solved if the technicolor dynamics is
the special one with very large anomalous dimension of the composite
operator @xmath composed by the technifermion field @xmath . Two types
of the models with large anomalous dimension have been proposed. One is
the gauge theory with slowly running coupling, another is the gauge
theory with strong four fermion interaction. It is expected that the
large anomalous dimension is realized in the tumbling gauge theory.

In this thesis we systematically estimate the strength of the effective
four fermion interactions induced in the tumbling gauge theory by using
the effective action within the one-gauge-boson-exchange approximation.
It is shown that the couplings of the effective four fermion
interactions cannot be large enough to realize sufficiently large
anomalous dimension. This result is important for the model building of
the extended technicolor theory. The decoupling of the gauge bosons and
fermions which get their masses in the process of tumbling is also
discussed. It is non-perturbatively shown that their effect on the low
energy dynamics is negligibly small.

Before the estimations, we give the explanation of the fundamental
techniques to treat the dynamical symmetry breaking. The scenario and
the phenomenology of the extended technicolor theory is also reviewed.
The restriction on the extended technicolor theory from the precision
experiments is discussed. It is emphasized that the non-oblique
correction is important as well as the oblique correction, since the top
quark is heavy.
