Calorons, or periodic instantons, are anti-self-dual (ASD) connections
on @xmath , and form an intermediate case between instantons (ASD
connections on @xmath ) and monopoles (translation invariant
instantons). Complete constructions of instantons and monopoles have
been found: there is a complete construction of instantons from
algebraic data, the ADHM construction due to Atiyah and others, while
Nahm gave a construction of monopoles from solutions to a system of ODEs
known as Nahm’s equation. Both these constructions can be thought of as
generalizations of a correspondence between ASD connections on the
@xmath -torus, and ASD connections over the dual @xmath -torus,
originally due to Mukai and Braam-van Baal. This correspondence, often
called the ‘Nahm transform’, is invertible and the inverse of the
transform is the transform itself up to sign. Given an ASD connection on
the @xmath -torus it is defined in terms of the kernel of a family of
Dirac operators parameterized by the dual torus. The aim of this thesis
is to generalize the Nahm transform to the caloron case. In particular,
our approach is via analysis of these families of Dirac operators rather
than via twistor theory.

We start by exploring topological aspects of calorons and boundary
conditions. These are needed to ensure that the Dirac operators that
define the Nahm transform are Fredholm. Our main innovation is to regard
@xmath as the interior of the closed @xmath -ball @xmath , and to
stipulate fixed behaviour on the boundary, rather than imposing
asymptotic boundary conditions. The boundary conditions for calorons can
be stated as follows: given a bundle on @xmath we fix some gauge @xmath
on the boundary, and we require that in the gauge @xmath , a @xmath
caloron must resemble the pull-back of a @xmath monopole. There is a
topological obstruction to extending @xmath to the interior of @xmath ,
which we call the ‘instanton charge’ of the caloron.

The Nahm transform of a caloron consists of a solution to Nahm’s
equation on @xmath , which we refer to as Nahm data. Many aspects of the
@xmath -torus transform generalize readily to the caloron case, and the
construction of calorons from Nahm data is very similar to the
construction of monopoles. The main difficulty in the construction lies
with recovering the boundary conditions for the caloron and calculating
its instanton charge. The caloron constructed from a set of Nahm data is
defined using a family of Dirac operators @xmath parameterized by @xmath
. Our approach is to deform @xmath to some model @xmath for which we can
recover the boundary conditions and calculate the instanton charge. We
then show that this deformation does not affect the behaviour on the
boundary. Thus we prove that every set of Nahm data on @xmath gives rise
to a caloron via the Nahm transform.

Going the other way, from the caloron to the Nahm data, we encounter two
main problems: first, we must calculate the rank of the Nahm data, which
can jump at isolated points on @xmath ; and secondly, we must show that
the Nahm data has certain prescribed singularities at these points. The
transform is defined in terms of a family of Dirac operators
parameterized by @xmath . We show that the caloron boundary conditions
ensure this family of Dirac operators is Fredholm away from the
prescribed points on @xmath . We also prove an index theorem for Dirac
operators coupled to connections on @xmath that allows us to calculate
the rank of the Nahm data. We obtain partial results concerning the
behaviour of the Nahm data at singularities. These are based on
Nakajima’s method for recovering the singularities in Nahm data
constructed from SU(2) monopoles.
