This PhD thesis in Mathematical Physics contains both a general overview
and some original research results about low dimensional conformal
Quantum Field Theory (QFT). The closer area of the work is chiral
conformal QFT in the so-called algebraic setting; i.e. the study of
Möbius covariant and diffeomorphism (or, as it is sometimes called:
conformal ) covariant local nets of von Neumann algebras on the circle.
From the mathematical point of view, it involves mainly functional
analyses, operator algebras, and representation theory (and in
particular, the representation theory of infinite dimensional Lie
groups).

The preliminary chapters give an overview, summarize some of the most
important known facts and give some examples for such local nets. This
is then followed by the presentation of the new results.

The questions considered are all about conformal covariance. First, what
algebraic property of the net could ensure the existence of an extension
of the Möbius symmetry to full diffeomorphism symmetry? Second, if
exists, is this extension of the symmetry unique? Third, what (new, so
far unknown) properties of the net are automatically guaranteed by the
mere existence of conformal covariance?

In relation with the existence, the author pinpoints a certain (but
purely algebraic) condition on the “relative position” of three local
algebras. (This condition is implied by diffeomorphism covariance and
even without assuming diffeomorphism covariance it can be proved to
hold, assuming complete rationality, for example.) Then it is shown that
the Möbius symmetry of a regular net (i.e. a net which is @xmath
-regular for every @xmath ; a property which is weaker than strong
additivity and expected to hold always in case of conformal covariance)
can be extended to certain nonsmooth transformations if and only if this
condition is satisfied, and that in this case the extension is unique.
Although the existence of an even further extension to the full
diffeomorphism group is not proved, for the author, as it will be
explained, it indicates that the introduced condition together with
regularity indeed ensure the existence of conformal covariance.

Two different proofs will be given to show that there is at most one way
the Möbius symmetry of a net can be extended to @xmath . One of them is
close to the setting of Quantum Fields (and in particular, to Vertex
Operator Algebras, as it is formulated at the level of Fourier modes) in
its spirit: it is based on the observation that there are only few
possibilities for commutation relations between fields of dimension
@xmath , whose integral is the conformal energy. (So it is in some sense
a version of the Lüscher-Mack theorem.)

This idea will be also used to show that every (Möbius covariant) subnet
of a conformal net is conformal covariant. In fact it will be proved
that given a subnet, the stress-energy tensor can be decomposed into two
in which one part belongs to the subnet while the other part to the
coset of the subnet.

The other argument needs @xmath -regularity but it is closer to the idea
of local algebras and it is a simple application of those nonsmooth
symmetries discussed before. This argument, too, implies the automatic
conformal covariance of a subnet, given that it is strongly additive,
for example.

Further applications of these results, such as the construction of new
examples of nets admitting no @xmath symmetry, will be also discussed.
Also, a model independent proof will be given for the commutation of
vacuum preserving gauge symmetries with diffeomorphism symmetries.

In connection with nonsmooth symmetries a new technique is developed:
the smearing of the stress-energy tensor with nonsmooth functions. This
technique will be also used to prove that every locally normal
representation of a conformal net is of positive energy.

Some of these results form the base of two articles. The first one is a
joint work and has been already published in Commun. Math. Phys., while
the second one is a single-author work accepted by the same journal.
