What are the information processing capabilities of physical systems?

As recently as the first half of the @xmath century this question did
not even have a definite meaning. What is information, and how would one
process it? It took the development of theories of computing (in the
1930s) and information (late in the 1940s) for us to formulate
mathematically what it means to compute or communicate.

Yet these theories were abstract, based on axiomatic mathematics: what
did physical systems have to do with these axioms? Rolf Landauer had the
essential insight — “Information is physical” — that information is
always encoded in the state of a physical system, whose dynamics on a
microscopic level are well-described by quantum physics. This means that
we cannot discuss information without discussing how it is represented,
and how nature dictates it should behave.

Wigner considered the situation from another perspective when he wrote
about “the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural
sciences”. Why are the computational techniques of mathematics so
astonishingly useful in describing the physical world [ 1 ] ? One might
begin to suspect foul play in the universe’s operating principles.

Interesting insights into the physics of information accumulated through
the 1970s and 1980s — most sensationally in the proposal for a “quantum
computer”. If we were to mark a particular year in which an explosion of
interest took place in information physics, that year would have to be
1994, when Shor showed that a problem of practical interest
(factorisation of integers) could be solved easily on a quantum
computer. But the applications of information in physics — and vice
versa — have been far more widespread than this popular discovery. These
applications range from improved experimental technology, more
sophisticated measurement techniques, methods for characterising the
quantum/classical boundary, tools for quantum chaos, and deeper insight
into quantum theory and nature.

In this thesis I present a short review of ideas in quantum information
theory. The first chapter contains introductory material, sketching the
central ideas of probability and information theory. Quantum mechanics
is presented at the level of advanced undergraduate knowledge, together
with some useful tools for quantum mechanics of open systems. In the
second chapter I outline how classical information is represented in
quantum systems and what this means for agents trying to extract
information from these systems. The final chapter presents a new
resource: quantum information. This resource has some bewildering
applications which have been discovered in the last ten years, and
continually presents us with unexpected insights into quantum theory and
the universe.
