Quantum information theory is an area of physics which studies both
fundamental and applied issues in quantum mechanics from an
information-theoretic viewpoint. The underlying techniques are, however,
often restricted to the analysis of systems which satisfy a certain
independence condition . For example, it is assumed that an experiment
can be repeated independently many times or that a large physical system
consists of many virtually independent parts. Unfortunately, such
assumptions are not always justified. This is particularly the case for
practical applications—e.g., in (quantum) cryptography—where parts of a
system might have an arbitrary and unknown behavior.

We propose an approach which allows to study general physical systems
for which the above mentioned independence condition does not
necessarily hold. It is based on an extension of various
information-theoretic notions. For example, we introduce new uncertainty
measures, called smooth min- and max-entropy , which are generalizations
of the von Neumann entropy. Furthermore, we develop a quantum version of
de Finetti’s representation theorem, as described below.

Consider a physical system consisting of @xmath parts. These might, for
instance, be the outcomes of @xmath runs of a physical experiment.
Moreover, assume that the joint state of this @xmath -partite system can
be extended to an @xmath -partite state which is symmetric under
permutations of its parts (for some @xmath ). The de Finetti
representation theorem then says that the original @xmath -partite state
is, in a certain sense, close to a mixture of product states.
Independence thus follows (approximatively) from a symmetry condition.
This symmetry condition can easily be met in many natural situations.
For example, it holds for the joint state of @xmath parts which are
chosen at random from an arbitrary @xmath -partite system.

As an application of these techniques, we prove the security of quantum
key distribution (QKD) , i.e., secret key agreement by communication
over a quantum channel. In particular, we show that, in order to analyze
QKD protocols, it is generally sufficient to consider so-called
collective attacks , where the adversary is restricted to applying the
same operation to each particle sent over the quantum channel
separately. The proof is generic and thus applies to known protocols
such as BB84 and B92 (where better bounds on the secret-key rate and on
the the maximum tolerated noise level of the quantum channel are
obtained) as well as to continuous variable schemes (where no full
security proof has been known). Furthermore, the security holds with
respect to a strong so-called universally composable definition. This
implies that the keys generated by a QKD protocol can safely be used in
any application, e.g., for one-time pad encryption—which, remarkably, is
not the case for most of the standard definitions.
