
The third chapter summarizes the theory of translation surfaces (or,
equivalently, abelian differentials), with an emphasis on the
Euclidean-geometric side. We also introduce our later counterexamples,
the Wiman curves . As translation surfaces, they can be very neatly
constructed from triangles whose angles are rational multiples of @xmath
. With the help of the Schwarz-Christoffel formula, a gem of 19th
century complex analysis, we can describe the Wiman curves as algebraic
curves with Kähler differentials. These computations are original, but
the idea is well-known to the experts, cf. [ 2 ] .

The fourth chapter then discusses the deformation theory of abelian
differentials and the related theory of Veech groups. There is also
nothing new in this chapter except for the presentation.

In the fifth chapter we set up the machinery necessary to understand the
Jacobian of a translation surface. For technical reasons we prefer to
work with Hodge structures instead of abelian varieties. In particular
we need to change coefficients of Hodge structures, even into rings
which are only contained in @xmath and not in @xmath . It seems that
this, although not difficult, has never been explicitly done in the
literature, so we do this here, at some places certainly more detailed
than strictly necessary for the proof of the main theorem. We also
discuss the action of the affine group of a translation surface on the
cohomology of the surface, which gives nontrivial arithmetic information
about the eigenvalues of elements of the Veech group (also previously
known material, but scattered around the literature).

Then in the sixth chapter we discuss trace fields of Veech groups. First
we give an overview about their properties and their significance (again
material which has been known, but distributed over many different
research papers). Then we compute the trace fields of our example
curves, using only elementary trigonometry; this is entirely new.

The seventh chapter then draws together the work of chapters 5 and 6.
First, local systems and their behaviour under base extension and Galois
conjugation are discussed. It also seems that there is no account of
this theory in the literature. The consequences that we really need for
our counterexamples are implicit in the literature, though. Then we
summarize the Deligne-Schmid theory on variations of Hodge structure and
explain how it enlightens the behaviour of Jacobians under the @xmath
-operation.

The eigth chapter is the actual heart of the present work. We introduce
a modified notion of real multiplication, better suited for this theory
than the classical one, and reformulate the results of McMullen and
Möller in this language, with proofs. The thesis concludes with Theorem
8.3.3 which shows that our counterexamples are actually counterexamples.
