In this thesis, we study the Hawking and Unruh effects in time-dependent
situations, as registered by localised spacetimes observers in several
asymptotic situations.

In @xmath dimensions, we develop the Unruh-DeWitt detector model that is
coupled to the proper time derivative of a real scalar field. This
detector is insensitive to the well-known massless scalar field infrared
ambiguity and has the correct massive-to-massless field limit. We then
consider three scenarios of interest for the Hawking effect. The first
one is an inertial detector in an exponentially receding mirror
spacetime, which traces the onset of an energy flux from the mirror,
with the expected Planckian late time asymptotics. The second one is the
transition rate of a detector that falls in from infinity in
Schwarzschild spacetime, gradually losing thermality. We find that the
detector’s transition rate diverges near the singularity proportionally
to @xmath . The third one is the characterisation of the strength of
divergence of the transition rate and of the (smeared) renormalised
local energy density along a trajectory that approaches the future
Cauchy horizon of a @xmath -dimensional spacetime that generalises the
non-extremal Reissner-Nordström spacetime and shares its causal
structure. In both cases, the strength of the divergence as a function
of the proper time is as on approaching the Schwarzschild singularity.
We then comment on the limitations of our @xmath -dimensional analysis
as a model for the full @xmath treatment.

In @xmath dimensions, we revisit the Unruh effect and study the onset of
the Unruh temperature. We treat an Unruh-DeWitt detector coupled to a
massless scalar through a smooth switching function of compact support
and prove that, while the Kubo-Martin-Schwinger (KMS) condition and the
detailed balance of the response are equivalent in the limit of long
interaction time, this equivalence is not uniform in the detector’s
energy gap. That is, we prove that the infinite-time and large-energy
limits do not commute. We then ask and answer the question of how long
one needs to wait to detect the Unruh temperature up to a prescribed
large energy scale. We show that, under technical conditions on the
switching function, in this large energy gap regime an adiabatically
switched detector following a Rindler orbit will thermalise in a time
scale that is polynomially large in the energy. We then consider an
interaction between the detector and the field that switches on,
interacts constantly for a long time, and then switches off. We show
that a polynomially fast thermalisation cannot occur if the constant
interaction time is polynomially large in the energy, with the switching
tails fixed. Thus, we conclude that the details of the switching are
relevant when estimating thermalisation time-scales.

A Montse.
