This Ph.D. thesis deals with the optimization of several renewable
energy resources development as well as the improvement of facilities
management in oceanic engineering and airports, using computational
hybrid methods belonging to Artificial Intelligent ( AI ) to this end.
These problems will be summarized hereafter with the technical solutions
proposed at the end of the section.

Energy is essential to our society in order to ensure a good quality of
life. Nowadays, fossil fuels are the most important energy source in the
planet. However they contribute to Climate Change greatly, affecting the
ecosystems severely. For this reason, there is a trend to gradually use
renewable resources which guarantee a sustainable development. In fact,
a penetration of these resources over the 50% are expected in fifty
years. Obviously, that process shall not be the same in all countries
due to renewable energy resources are not uniformly distributed
throughout the World. It is important to note that different regions
rely on different renewable technologies, so they can contribute to
regional development in a larger or lesser degree. The main drawback of
renewable energies is the natural variability inherent to the resource.
This means that predictions over the characteristics on which renewable
energies depend are necessary, in order to know the amount of energy
that will be obtained at any time.

The second topic tackled in this thesis is related to the basic
parameters that influence in different marine activities and airports,
whose knowledge is necessary to develop a proper facilities management
in these environments. For instance, the Significant Wave Height (
@xmath ) is a basic parameter in wave characterization, important to
different problems in marine activities such as the design and
management of vessels, marine structures, Wave Energy Converters ( WECs
), etc. On the other hand, the low-visibility events at airports,
normally caused by fog events, is another fundamental issue in airport
activities which can cause flight delays, diversions and cancellations
or accidents in the worst cases.

Within this work, a study of the state-of-the-art Machine Learning ( ML
) have been performed to solve the problems associated with the topics
above-mentioned, and several contributions have been proposed:

-   One of the pillars of this work is focused on the estimation of the
    most important parameters in the exploitation of renewable
    resources. For this purpose, Support-Vector Regression ( SVR ),
    Neural Network ( NN ) ( Multi-Layer Perceptron ( MLP ) and
    Extreme-Learning Machine ( ELM )) and Gaussian process ( GP )
    algorithms are used in several practical problems. The performance
    of these algorithms is discussed in every experiment carried out,
    and also the specific settings of the algorithms, as well as
    internal characteristics of the models.

-   The second contribution of this thesis is related to feature
    selection problems. More specifically, the use of EAs as Grouping
    Genetic Algorithm ( GGA ) or Coral Reef Optimization ( CRO )
    hybridized with others ML approaches as classifiers and regressors.
    Regarding this, the GGA or CRO looks for several subsets of features
    important to solve the problem, and the regressor employed provides
    the prediction in terms of the features selected by the Genetic
    Algorithm ( GA ), reducing the computational cost with a good
    accuracy.

The proposed methodologies are applied to multiple problems: the
prediction of @xmath , relevant for marine energy applications and
marine activities, the estimation of Wind Power Ramps Events ( WPREs ),
undesirable variations in the electric power produced by a wind farm,
the prediction of global solar radiation in areas from Spain and
Australia, really important in terms of solar energy, and the prediction
of low-visibility events at airports. All of these practical issues are
developed with the consequent previous data analysis, normally, in terms
of meteorological variables.
